Coffee is a beverage brewed from roasted, ground coffee beans. Darkly colored, bitter, and slightly acidic, coffee has a stimulating effect on humans, primarily due to its caffeine content, but decaffeinated coffee is also commercially available. There are also various coffee substitutes. Typically served hot, coffee has the highest sales in the world market for hot drinks.[4]

Coffee production begins when the seeds from coffee cherries (the Coffea plant's fruits) are separated to produce unroasted green coffee beans. The "beans" are roasted and then ground into fine particles. Coffee is brewed from the ground roasted beans, which are typically steeped in hot water before being filtered out. It is usually served hot, although chilled or iced coffee is common. Coffee can be prepared and presented in a variety of ways (e.g., espresso, French press, caffè latte, or already-brewed canned coffee). Sugar, sugar substitutes, milk, and cream are often added to mask the bitter taste or enhance the flavor.

Though coffee is now a global commodity, it has a long history tied closely to food traditions around the Red Sea. Credible evidence of coffee drinking as the modern beverage subsequently appears in modern-day Yemen in southern Arabia in the middle of the 15th century in Sufi shrines, where coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed in a manner similar to how it is now prepared for drinking.[5] The coffee beans were procured by the Yemenis from the Ethiopian Highlands via coastal Somali intermediaries, and cultivated in Yemen. By the 16th century, the drink had reached the rest of the Middle East and North Africa, later spreading to Europe.

The two most commonly grown coffee bean types are C. arabica and C. robusta.[6] Coffee plants are cultivated in over 70 countries, primarily in the equatorial regions of the Americas, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, and Africa. Green, unroasted coffee is traded as an agricultural commodity. The global coffee industry is worth $495.50 billion, as of 2023.[7] In 2023, Brazil was the leading grower of coffee beans, producing 31% of the world's total, followed by Vietnam. While coffee sales reach billions of dollars annually worldwide, coffee farmers disproportionately live in poverty. Critics of the coffee industry have also pointed to its negative impact on the environment and the clearing of land for coffee-growing and water use.
Etymology
Green coffee describes the beans before roasting.

The word coffee entered the English language in 1582 via the Dutch koffie, borrowed from the Ottoman Turkish kahve (قهوه), borrowed in turn from the Arabic qahwah (قَهْوَة).[8] Medieval Arabic lexicons traditionally held that the etymology of qahwah meant 'wine', given its distinctly dark color, and was derived from the verb qahiya (قَهِيَ), 'to have no appetite'.[9] The word qahwah most likely meant 'the dark one', referring to the brew or the bean; qahwah is not the name of the bean, which are known in Arabic as bunn and in Cushitic languages as būn. Semitic languages have the root qhh, 'dark color', which became a natural designation for the beverage. Its cognates include the Hebrew qehe(h) 'dulling' and the Aramaic qahey ('give acrid taste to').[9] Although etymologists have connected it with a word meaning 'wine', it is also thought to be from the Kaffa region of Ethiopia.[10]

The terms coffee pot and coffee break originated in 1705 and 1952, respectively.[11]
History
Main article: History of coffee
Legendary accounts
Main article: Kaldi

There are multiple anecdotal origin stories which lack evidence. In a commonly repeated legend, Kaldi, a 9th-century Ethiopian goatherd, first observed the coffee plant after seeing his flock energized by chewing on the plant.[5] This legend does not appear before 1671, first being related by Antoine Faustus Nairon, a Maronite professor of Oriental languages and author of one of the first printed treatises devoted to coffee, De Saluberrima potione Cahue seu Cafe nuncupata Discurscus (Rome, 1671), indicating the story is likely apocryphal.[12][13][5] Another legend attributes the discovery of coffee to a Sheikh Omar. Starving after being exiled from Mokha (a port city in what is now Yemen), Omar found berries. After attempting to chew and roast them, Omar boiled them, which yielded a liquid that revitalized and sustained him.[1]
Historical transmission
A 1652 handbill advertising coffee for sale in St. Michael's Alley, London

The earliest recorded reference to the coffee bean and its qualities appears in a treatise by Al-Razi, which describes the bean—referred to as “bunchum”—as “hot and dry and very good for the stomach".[1] One of the most important of the early writers on coffee was Abd al-Qadir al-Jaziri, who in 1587 compiled a work tracing the history and legal controversies of coffee entitled Umdat al Safwa fi hill al-qahwa in which he claims that coffee originated "in the land of Ibn Sa‘d al-Dın and the country of the Abyssinians and of the Jabart and other places of the land of ‘Ajam, but the time of its first [use] is unknown, nor do we know the reason".[14]

Credible evidence of coffee drinking or knowledge of the coffee tree appears in the middle of the 15th century in the accounts of Ahmed al-Ghaffar in Yemen,[5] where coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed in a similar way to how it is prepared now. Coffee was used by Sufi circles to stay awake for their religious rituals.[15] Accounts differ on the origin of the coffee plant before its appearance in Yemen. From Ethiopia, coffee could have been introduced to Yemen via trade across the Red Sea.[16] One account credits Muhammad Ibn Sa'd for bringing the beverage to Aden from the African coast,[17] other early accounts say Ali ben Omar of the Shadhili Sufi order was the first to introduce coffee to Arabia.[17][18]

16th-century Islamic scholar Ibn Hajar al-Haytami notes in his writings that a beverage called qahwa developed from a tree in the Zeila region located in the Horn of Africa.[15] Coffee was first exported from Ethiopia to Yemen by Somali merchants from Berbera and Zeila in modern-day Somaliland, which was procured from Harar and the Abyssinian interior. According to Captain Haines, who was the colonial administrator of Aden (1839–1854), Mokha historically imported up to two-thirds of its coffee from Berbera-based merchants before the coffee trade of Mokha was captured by British-controlled Aden in the 19th century. After that, much of the Ethiopian coffee was exported to Aden via Berbera.[19]

By the 16th century, coffee had reached the rest of the Middle East and North Africa.[20] The first coffee seeds were smuggled out of the Middle East by Sufi Baba Budan from Yemen to India during the time. Before then, all exported coffee was boiled or otherwise sterilized. Portraits of Baba Budan depict him as having smuggled seven coffee seeds by strapping them to his chest. The first plants from these smuggled seeds were planted in Mysore.

Coffee had spread to Italy by 1600 and then to the rest of Europe, Indonesia, and the Americas.[21]

In 1583, Leonhard Rauwolf, a German physician, gave this description of coffee after returning from a ten-year trip to the Near East:

    A beverage as black as ink, useful against numerous illnesses, particularly those of the stomach. Its consumers take it in the morning, quite frankly, in a porcelain cup passed around and from which each one drinks a cupful. It is composed of water and the fruit from a bush called bunnu.
    — Léonard Rauwolf, Reise in die Morgenländer (in German)

Thriving trade brought many goods, including coffee, from the Ottoman Empire to Venice. From there it was introduced to the rest of Europe. Coffee became more widely accepted after it was deemed a Christian beverage by Pope Clement VIII in 1600, despite appeals to ban the "Muslim drink". The first European coffee house opened in Venice in 1647.[22]
As a colonial import
A late 19th-century advertisement for coffee essence
A 1919 advertisement for G Washington's Coffee. The first instant coffee was invented by inventor George Washington in 1909.

The Dutch East India Company was the first to import coffee on a large scale.[1] The Dutch later grew the crop in Java and Ceylon.[23] The first exports of Indonesian coffee from Java to the Netherlands occurred in 1711.[24]

Through the efforts of the British East India Company, coffee also became popular in England. In a diary entry of May 1637, John Evelyn recorded tasting the drink at Oxford in England, where it had been brought by a student of Balliol College from Crete named Nathaniel Conopios of Crete.[25][26] Oxford's Queen's Lane Coffee House, established in 1654, is still in existence today. Coffee was introduced in France in 1657 and in Austria and Poland after the 1683 Battle of Vienna, when coffee was captured from supplies of the defeated Turks.[27]

When coffee reached North America during the Colonial period, it was initially not as successful as in Europe, as alcoholic beverages remained more popular. During the Revolutionary War, the demand for coffee increased so much that dealers had to hoard their scarce supplies and raise prices dramatically; this was also due to the reduced availability of tea from British merchants,[28] and a general resolution among many Americans to avoid drinking tea following the 1773 Boston Tea Party.[29]

During the 18th century, coffee consumption declined in Britain, giving way to tea drinking. Tea was simpler to make, and had become cheaper with the British conquest of India and the tea industry there.[30] During the Age of Sail, seamen aboard ships of the British Royal Navy made substitute coffee by dissolving burnt bread in hot water.[31]

The Frenchman Gabriel de Clieu took a coffee plant to the French territory of Martinique in the Caribbean in the 1720s,[32] from which much of the world's cultivated arabica coffee is descended. Coffee thrived in the climate and was conveyed across the Americas.[33] Coffee was cultivated in Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) from 1734, and by 1788 it supplied half the world's coffee.[34] The conditions that the enslaved people worked in on coffee plantations were a factor in the soon to follow Haitian Revolution. The coffee industry never fully recovered there.[35]
Mass production
A coffee can from the first half of the 20th century. From the Museo del Objeto del Objeto collection.

Meanwhile, coffee had been introduced to Brazil in 1727, although its cultivation did not gather momentum until independence in 1822.[36] After this time, massive tracts of rainforest were cleared for coffee plantations, first in the vicinity of Rio de Janeiro and later São Paulo.[37] Brazil went from having essentially no coffee exports in 1800 to being a significant regional producer in 1830, to being the largest producer in the world by 1852. In 1910–1920, Brazil exported around 70% of the world's coffee, Colombia, Guatemala, and Venezuela exported 15%, and Old World production accounted for less than 5% of world exports.[38]

Many countries in Central America took up cultivation in the latter half of the 19th century, and almost all were involved in the large-scale displacement and exploitation of the indigenous people. Harsh conditions led to many uprisings, coups, and bloody suppression of peasants.[39] The notable exception was Costa Rica, where lack of ready labor prevented the formation of large farms. Smaller farms and more egalitarian conditions ameliorated unrest over the 19th and 20th centuries.[40]

Rapid growth in coffee production in South America during the second half of the 19th century was matched by an increase in consumption in developed countries, though nowhere has this growth been as pronounced as in the United States, where a high rate of population growth was compounded by doubling of per capita consumption between 1860 and 1920. Though the United States was not the heaviest coffee-drinking nation at the time (Belgium, the Netherlands and Nordic countries all had comparable or higher levels of per capita consumption), due to its sheer size, it was already the largest consumer of coffee in the world by 1860, and, by 1920, around half of all coffee produced worldwide was consumed in the US.[38]

Coffee has become a vital cash crop for many developing countries. Over one hundred million people in developing countries have become dependent on coffee as their primary source of income. It has become the primary export and economic backbone for African countries like Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia,[41] as well as many Central American countries.
Biology
Main articles: Coffea and List of coffee varieties

Several species of shrub of the genus Coffea produce the berries from which coffee is extracted. The two main species commercially cultivated are Coffea canephora (predominantly a form known as 'robusta') and C. arabica.[42] C. arabica, the most highly regarded species, is native to the southwestern highlands of Ethiopia and the Boma Plateau in southeastern Sudan and Mount Marsabit in northern Kenya.[43] C. canephora is native to western and central Subsaharan Africa, from Guinea to Uganda and southern Sudan.[44] Less popular species are C. liberica, C. stenophylla, C. mauritiana, and C. racemosa.

All coffee plants are classified in the large family Rubiaceae. They are evergreen shrubs or trees that may grow 5 m (15 ft) tall when unpruned. The leaves are dark green and glossy, usually 10–15 cm (4–6 in) long and 6 cm (2.4 in) wide, simple, entire, and opposite. Petioles of opposite leaves fuse at the base to form interpetiolar stipules, characteristic of Rubiaceae. The flowers are axillary, and clusters of fragrant white flowers bloom simultaneously. Gynoecium consists of an inferior ovary, also characteristic of Rubiaceae. The flowers are followed by oval berries of about 1.5 cm (0.6 in).[45] When immature, they are green, and they ripen to yellow, then crimson, before turning black on drying. Each berry usually contains two seeds, but 5–10% of the berries[46] have only one; these are called peaberries.[47] Arabica berries ripen in six to eight months, while robusta takes nine to eleven months.[48]

Coffea arabica is predominantly self-pollinating, and as a result, the seedlings are generally uniform and vary little from their parents. In contrast, Coffea canephora, and C. liberica are self-incompatible and require outcrossing. This means that useful forms and hybrids must be propagated vegetatively.[49] Cuttings, grafting, and budding are the usual methods of vegetative propagation.[50] On the other hand, there is great scope for experimentation in search of potential new strains.[49]

    Illustration of a single branch of a plant. Broad, ribbed leaves are accented by small white flowers at the base of the stalk. On the edge of the drawing are cutaway diagrams of parts of the plant.
    Illustration of Coffea arabica plant and seeds
    Coffea robusta flowers
    Coffea robusta flowers
    A flowering Coffea arabica tree
    A flowering Coffea arabica tree
    Coffea arabica berries on the bush
    Coffea arabica berries on the bush

Cultivation and production
Further information: Coffee production and List of countries by coffee production
Map showing areas of coffee cultivation:
r Coffea canephora
m Coffea canephora and Coffea arabica
a Coffea arabica

The traditional method of planting coffee is to place 20 seeds in each hole at the beginning of the rainy season. This method loses about 50% of the seeds' potential, as about half fail to sprout. A more effective process of growing coffee, used in Brazil, is to raise seedlings in nurseries that are then planted outside after six to twelve months. Coffee is often intercropped with food crops, such as corn, beans, or rice during the first few years of cultivation as farmers become familiar with its requirements.[45] Coffee plants grow within a defined area between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, termed the bean belt or coffee belt.[51]

In 2020, the world production of green coffee beans was 175,647,000 60 kg bags, led by Brazil with 39% of the total, followed by Vietnam, Colombia, and Indonesia.[52] Brazil is the largest coffee exporting nation, accounting for 15% of all world exports in 2019.[53] As of 2021, no synthetic coffee products are publicly available but multiple bioeconomy companies have reportedly produced first batches that are highly similar on the molecular level and are close to commercialization.[54][55][56]
Species variations

Of the two main species grown, arabica coffee (from C. arabica) is generally more highly regarded than robusta coffee (from C. canephora). Robusta coffee tends to be bitter and has less flavor but a better body than arabica. For these reasons, about three-quarters of coffee cultivated worldwide is C. arabica.[42] Robusta strains also contain about 40–50% more caffeine than arabica.[57] Consequently, this species is used as an inexpensive substitute for arabica in many commercial coffee blends. Good quality robusta beans are used in traditional Italian espresso blends to provide a full-bodied taste and a better foam head (known as crema).
Coffee leaf rust has forced the cultivation of resistant robusta coffee in many countries.[58]

Additionally, robusta is less susceptible to disease than arabica and can be cultivated in lower altitudes and warmer climates where arabica does not thrive.[59] The robusta strain was first collected in 1890 from the Lomani River, a tributary of the Congo River, and was conveyed from the Congo Free State (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) to Brussels to Java around 1900. From Java, further breeding resulted in the establishment of robusta plantations in many countries.[58] In particular, the spread of the devastating coffee leaf rust (caused by the fungal pathogen Hemileia vastatrix), to which arabica is vulnerable, hastened the uptake of the resistant robusta. The pathogen and results in light, rust-colored spots on the undersides of coffee plant leaves.[60] It grows exclusively on the leaves of coffee plants.[61] Coffee leaf rust is found in virtually all countries that produce coffee.[62]

Beans from different countries or regions can usually be distinguished by differences in flavor, aroma, body, and acidity.[63] These taste characteristics are dependent not only on the coffee's growing region but also on genetic subspecies (varietals) and processing.[64] Varietals are generally known by the region in which they are grown, such as Colombian, Java, and Kona. Arabica coffee beans are cultivated mainly in Latin America, eastern Africa or Asia, while robusta beans are grown in central Africa, southeast Asia, and Brazil.[42]

Coffee can also be blended with medicinal or functional mushrooms, of which some of the most frequently used include lion's mane, chaga, Cordyceps, and reishi.[65] Mushroom coffee has about half the caffeine of standard coffee.[66] However, drinking mushroom coffee can result in digestive issues and high amounts can result in liver toxicity.[66] There is little clinical evidence for the benefits of mushroom coffee.[67]
Pests and treatments
Fungi
Robusta coffee tree infected by coffee wilt disease

Coffee wilt disease or tracheomycosis is a common vascular wilt found in Eastern and Central Africa that can kill coffee trees it infects. It is induced by the fungal pathogen Gibberella xylarioides. It can affect several Coffea species, and could potentially threaten production worldwide.[68]

Mycena citricolor, American leaf spot, is a fungus that can affect the whole coffee plant. It grows on leaves, resulting in leaves with holes that often fall from the plant. It is a threat primarily in Latin America.[69]
Animals
The coffee borer beetle is a major insect pest of the world's coffee industry.[70]

Over 900 species of insect have been recorded as pests of coffee crops worldwide. Of these, over a third are beetles, and over a quarter are bugs. Some 20 species of nematodes, 9 species of mites, and several snails and slugs also attack the crop. Birds and rodents sometimes eat coffee berries, but their impact is minor compared to invertebrates.[71] In general, arabica is the more sensitive species to invertebrate predation overall. Each part of the coffee plant is assailed by different animals. Nematodes attack the roots, coffee borer beetles burrow into stems and woody material,[72] and the foliage is attacked by over 100 species of larvae (caterpillars) of butterflies and moths.[73]

Mass spraying of insecticides has often proven disastrous, as predators of the pests are more sensitive than the pests themselves.[74] Instead, integrated pest management has developed, using techniques such as targeted treatment of pest outbreaks, and managing crop environment away from conditions favoring pests. Branches infested with scale are often cut and left on the ground, which causes scale parasites to not only attack the scale on the fallen branches but in the plant as well.[75]

The 2-mm-long coffee borer beetle (Hypothenemus hampei) is the most damaging insect pest of the world's coffee industry, destroying up to 50 percent or more of the coffee berries on plantations in most coffee-producing countries. The adult female beetle nibbles a single tiny hole in a coffee berry and lays 35 to 50 eggs. Inside, the offspring grow, mate, and then emerge from the commercially ruined berry to disperse, repeating the cycle. Pesticides are mostly ineffective because the beetle juveniles are protected inside the berry nurseries, but they are vulnerable to predation by birds when they emerge. When groves of trees are nearby, the American yellow warbler, rufous-capped warbler, and other insectivorous birds have been shown to reduce by 50 percent the number of coffee berry borers in Costa Rica coffee plantations.[70]
Ecological effects
See also: Sustainable coffee
Shade-grown coffee in Guatemala

Originally, coffee was grown in the shade of trees that provided a habitat for many animals and insects.[76] Remnant forest trees were used for this purpose, but many species have been planted as well. These include leguminous trees of the genera Acacia, Albizia, Cassia, Erythrina, Gliricidia, Inga, and Leucaena, as well as the nitrogen-fixing non-legume sheoaks of the genus Casuarina, and the silky oak Grevillea robusta.[77]

This method is commonly called "shade-grown coffee". Starting in the 1970s, many farmers switched their production method to sun cultivation, in which coffee is grown in rows under full sun with little or no forest canopy. This causes berries to ripen more rapidly and bushes to produce higher yields, but requires the clearing of trees and increased use of fertilizer and pesticides, which damage the environment and cause health problems.[78]

Unshaded coffee plants grown with fertilizer yield the most coffee, although unfertilized shaded crops generally yield more than unfertilized unshaded crops: the response to fertilizer is much greater in full sun.[79] While traditional coffee production causes berries to ripen more slowly and produce lower yields, the quality of the coffee is allegedly superior.[80] In addition, the traditional shaded method provides living space for many wildlife species. Proponents of shade cultivation say environmental problems such as deforestation, pesticide pollution, habitat destruction, and soil and water degradation are the side effects of the practices employed in sun cultivation.[76][81]

The American Birding Association, Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center,[82] National Arbor Day Foundation,[83] and the Rainforest Alliance have led a campaign for 'shade-grown' and organic coffees, which can be sustainably harvested.[84] Shaded coffee cultivation systems show greater biodiversity than full-sun systems, and those more distant from continuous forest compare rather poorly to undisturbed native forest in terms of habitat value for some bird species.[85][86]

Coffee production uses a large volume of water. On average it takes about 140 litres (37 US gal) of water to grow the coffee beans needed to produce one cup of coffee. Growing the plants needed to produce 1 kg (2.2 lb) of roasted coffee in Africa, South America or Asia requires 26,400 litres (7,000 US gal) of water.[87] As with many other forms of agriculture, often much of this is rainwater, much of which would otherwise run off into rivers or coastlines, while much water actually absorbed by the plants is transpired straight back into the local environment through the plants' leaves (especially for cooling effects); broad estimates aside, consequential margins vary considerably based on details of local geography and horticultural practice. Coffee is often grown in countries where there is a water shortage, such as Ethiopia.[88]

Used coffee grounds may be used for composting or as a mulch. They are especially appreciated by worms and acid-loving plants such as blueberries.[89] Climate change may significantly impact coffee yields during the 21st century, such as in Nicaragua and Ethiopia which could lose more than half of the farming land suitable for growing (Arabica) coffee.[90][91][92] As of 2016, at least 34% of global coffee production was compliant with voluntary sustainability standards such as Fairtrade, UTZ, and 4C (The Common Code for the Coffee Community).[93]
Preprocessing

Coffee berries are traditionally selectively picked by hand, which is labor-intensive as it involves the selection of only the berries at the peak of ripeness. More commonly, crops are strip picked, where all berries are harvested simultaneously regardless of ripeness by person or machine. After picking, green coffee is processed by one of two types of method—a dry process method which is often simpler and less labor-intensive, and a wet process method, which incorporates batch fermentation, uses larger amounts of water in the process, and often yields a milder coffee.[94]

Then they are sorted by ripeness and color, and most often the flesh of the berry is removed, usually by machine, and the seeds are fermented to remove the slimy layer of mucilage still present on the seed. When the fermentation is finished, the seeds are washed with large quantities of fresh water to remove the fermentation residue, which generates massive amounts of coffee wastewater. Finally, the seeds are dried.[95]

The best (but least used) method of drying coffee is using drying tables. In this method, the pulped and fermented coffee is spread thinly on raised beds, which allows the air to pass on all sides of the coffee, and then the coffee is mixed by hand. The drying that then takes place is more uniform, and fermentation is less likely. Most African coffee is dried in this manner and certain coffee farms around the world are starting to use this traditional method.[95] Next, the coffee is sorted, and labeled as green coffee. Some companies use cylinders to pump in heated air to dry the coffee seeds, though this is generally in places where the humidity is very high.[95]
Kopi luwak, coffee berries that have been preprocessed by passing through the Asian palm civet's digestive tract[96]

An Asian coffee known as kopi luwak undergoes a peculiar process made from coffee berries eaten by the Asian palm civet, passing through its digestive tract, with the beans eventually harvested from feces. Coffee brewed from this process[96] is among the most expensive in the world, with bean prices reaching $160 per pound or $30 per brewed cup.[97] Kopi luwak coffee is said to have a uniquely rich, slightly smoky aroma and flavor with hints of chocolate, resulting from the action of digestive enzymes breaking down bean proteins to facilitate partial fermentation.[96][97] In Thailand, black ivory coffee beans are fed to elephants whose digestive enzymes reduce the bitter taste of beans collected from dung.[98] These beans sell for up to $1,100 a kilogram ($500 per lb), achieving the world's most expensive coffee,[98] three times costlier than palm civet coffee beans.[97]
Processing
Roasting
Main article: Coffee roasting
Roasted coffee beans

The next step in the process is the roasting of green coffee. Coffee is usually sold in a roasted state, and with rare exceptions, such as infusions from green coffee beans,[99] coffee is roasted before it is consumed. It can be sold roasted by the supplier, or it can be home roasted.[100] The roasting process influences the taste of the beverage by changing the coffee bean both physically and chemically. The bean decreases in weight as moisture is lost and increases in volume, causing it to become less dense. The density of the bean also influences the strength of the coffee and the requirements for packaging.

The actual roasting begins when the temperature inside the bean reaches approximately 200 °C (392 °F), though different varieties of seeds differ in moisture and density and therefore roast at different rates.[101] During roasting, caramelization occurs as intense heat breaks down starches, changing them to simple sugars that begin to brown, which darkens the color of the bean.[102]

Sucrose is rapidly lost during the roasting process, and may disappear entirely in darker roasts. During roasting, aromatic oils and acids weaken, changing the flavor; at 205 °C (401 °F), other oils start to develop.[101] One of these oils, caffeol, is created at about 200 °C (392 °F), and is largely responsible for coffee's aroma and flavor.[23] The difference of caffeine content between a light roast and a dark roast is only about 0.1%.[103]
Grading roasted beans
See also: Food grading
Two men hold spoons over a row of cups filled with coffee.
Coffee "cuppers", or professional tasters, grade the coffee.

Depending on the color of the roasted beans as perceived by the human eye, they will be labeled as light, medium light, medium, medium dark, dark, or very dark. A more accurate method of discerning the degree of roast involves measuring the reflected light from roasted seeds illuminated with a light source in the near-infrared spectrum. This elaborate light meter uses a process known as spectroscopy to return a number that consistently indicates the roasted coffee's relative degree of roast or flavor development. Coffee has, in many countries, been graded by size longer than it has been graded by quality. Grading is generally done with sieves, numbered to indicate the size of the perforations.[104]
Roast characteristics

The degree of roast affects coffee flavor and body. The color of coffee after brewing is also affected by the degree of roasting.[105] Darker roasts are generally bolder because they have less fiber content and a more sugary flavor. Lighter roasts have a more complex and therefore perceived stronger flavor from aromatic oils and acids otherwise destroyed by longer roasting times.[106] Roasting does not alter the amount of caffeine in the bean, but does give less caffeine when the beans are measured by volume because the beans expand during roasting.[107] A small amount of chaff is produced during roasting from the skin left on the seed after processing.[108] Chaff is usually removed from the seeds by air movement, though a small amount is added to dark roast coffees to soak up oils on the seeds.[101]
Decaffeination

Decaffeination of coffee seeds is done while the seeds are still green. Many methods can remove caffeine from coffee, but all involve either soaking the green seeds in hot water (often called the "Swiss water process")[109] or steaming them, then using a solvent to dissolve caffeine-containing oils.[23] Decaffeination is often done by processing companies, and the extracted caffeine is usually sold to the pharmaceutical industry.[23]
Storage
Main article: Coffee bean storage
Coffee container

Coffee is best stored in an airtight container made of ceramic, glass or non-reactive metal.[110] Higher quality prepackaged coffee usually has a one-way valve that prevents air from entering while allowing the coffee to release gases.[111] Coffee freshness and flavor is preserved when it is stored away from moisture, heat, and light. The tendency of coffee to absorb strong smells from food means that it should be kept away from such smells. Storage of coffee in refrigerators is not recommended due to the presence of moisture which can cause deterioration. Exterior walls of buildings that face the sun may heat the interior of a home, and this heat may damage coffee stored near such a wall. Heat from nearby ovens also harms stored coffee.[110]

In 1931, a method of packing coffee in a sealed vacuum in cans was introduced. The roasted coffee was packed and then 99% of the air was removed, allowing the coffee to be stored indefinitely until the can was opened. Today this method is in mass use for coffee in a large part of the world.[112]
Brewing
Main article: Coffee brewing
A contemporary electric automatic drip-coffee maker
Espresso is one of the most popular coffee-brewing methods. The term espresso, substituting s for most x letters in Latin-root words, with the term deriving from the past participle of the Italian verb esprimere, itself derived from the Latin exprimere, means 'to express', and refers to the process by which hot water is forced under pressure through ground coffee.[113][114]

Coffee beans must be ground and brewed to create a beverage. The criteria for choosing a method include flavor and economy. Almost all methods of preparing coffee require that the beans be ground and then mixed with hot water long enough to allow the flavor to emerge but not so long as to draw out bitter compounds. The liquid can be consumed after the spent grounds are removed. Brewing considerations include the fineness of the grind, how the water is used to extract the flavor, the ratio of coffee grounds to water (the brew ratio), additional flavorings such as sugar, milk, and spices, and the technique to be used to separate spent grounds. Optimal coffee extraction occurs between 91 and 96 °C (196 and 205 °F).[115] Ideal holding temperatures range from 85 to 88 °C (185 to 190 °F) to as high as 93 °C (199 °F) and the ideal serving temperature is 68 to 79 °C (154 to 174 °F).[116]

Coffee beans may be ground with a burr grinder, which uses revolving elements to shear the seed; a blade grinder cuts the seeds with blades moving at high speed; and a mortar and pestle crush the seeds. For most brewing methods a burr grinder is deemed superior because the grind is more even and the grind size can be adjusted.[117] The type of grind is often named after the brewing method for which it is generally used, Turkish grind being the finest, while coffee percolator or French press are the coarsest. The most common grinds are between these extremes: a medium grind is used in most home coffee-brewing machines.[118]

Coffee may be brewed by several methods. It may be boiled, steeped, or pressurized. Brewing coffee by boiling was the earliest method, and Turkish coffee is an example of this method. It is prepared by grinding or pounding the seeds to a fine powder, then adding it to water and bringing it to a boil for no more than an instant in a pot called a cezve or, in Greek, a μπρίκι: bríki (from Turkish ibrik). This produces a strong coffee with a layer of foam on the surface and sediment (which is not meant for drinking) settling at the bottom of the cup.[1]

Drip brewers and automatic coffeemakers brew coffee using gravity. In an automatic coffeemaker, hot water drips onto coffee grounds that are held in a paper, plastic, or perforated metal coffee filter, allowing the water to seep through the ground coffee while extracting its oils and essences. The liquid drips through the coffee and the filter into a carafe or pot, and the spent coffee grounds are retained in the filter.[119]

In a coffee percolator, water is pulled under a pipe by gravity, which is then forced into a chamber above a filter by steam pressure created by boiling. The water then seeps through the grounds, and the process is repeated until terminated by removing from the heat, by an internal timer,[120] or by a thermostat that turns off the heater when the entire pot reaches a certain temperature.

The espresso method forces hot pressurized water through finely-ground coffee.[118] As a result of brewing under high pressure (typically 9 bar),[121] the espresso beverage is more concentrated (as much as 10 to 15 times the quantity of coffee to water as gravity-brewing methods can produce) and has a more complex physical and chemical constitution.[122] A well-prepared espresso has a reddish-brown foam called crema that floats on the surface.[118] Other pressurized water methods include the moka pot and vacuum coffee maker. The AeroPress also works similarly, moving a column of water through a bed of coffee.

Cold brew coffee is made by steeping coarsely ground beans in cold water for several hours, then filtering them.[123] This results in a brew lower in acidity than most hot-brewing methods.
Serving
"Black coffee" redirects here. For other uses, see Black Coffee (disambiguation).
See also: List of coffee drinks
Enjoying coffee in Ottoman Empire. Painting by unknown artist in the Pera Museum.

Once brewed, coffee may be served in a variety of ways. Drip-brewed, percolated, or French-pressed/cafetière coffee may be served as white coffee with a dairy product such as milk or cream, or dairy substitute, or as black coffee with no such addition. It may be sweetened with sugar or artificial sweetener. When served cold, it is called iced coffee.

Espresso-based coffee has a variety of possible presentations. In its most basic form, an espresso is served alone as a shot or short black, or with hot water added, when it is known as Caffè Americano. A long black is made by pouring a double espresso into an equal portion of water, retaining the crema, unlike Caffè Americano.[124] Milk is added in various forms to an espresso: steamed milk makes a caffè latte,[125] equal parts steamed milk and milk froth make a cappuccino,[124] and a dollop of hot foamed milk on top creates a caffè macchiato.[126] A flat white is prepared by adding steamed hot milk (microfoam) to two espresso shots.[127] It has less milk than a latte, but both are varieties of coffee to which the milk can be added in such a way as to create a decorative surface pattern. Such effects are known as latte art.[128]

Coffee is frequently served iced. Popular options include Frappés, Iced lattes, or stronger brewed coffee served with ice.[129]

Coffee can also be incorporated with alcohol to produce a variety of beverages: it is combined with whiskey in Irish coffee, and it forms the base of alcoholic coffee liqueurs such as Kahlúa and Tia Maria. Some craft beers have coffee or coffee extracts added to the beer,[130] although porter and stout beers may have a coffee-like taste solely due to roasted grains.[131]
Instant coffee
Main article: Instant coffee
Instant coffee

Many products are sold for the convenience of consumers who do not want to prepare their coffee or who do not have access to coffeemaking equipment. Instant coffee is dried into soluble powder or freeze-dried into granules that can be quickly dissolved in hot water.[132] A New Zealand invention and staple, instant coffee was originally invented in Invercargill in 1890, by food chemist David Strang.[133] It rapidly gained in popularity in many countries in the post-war period, with Nescafé being the most popular product.[134] Many consumers determined that the convenience of preparing a cup of instant coffee more than made up for a perceived inferior taste,[135] although, since the late 1970s, instant coffee has been produced differently in such a way that is similar to the taste of freshly brewed coffee.[136] Paralleling (and complementing) the rapid rise of instant coffee was the coffee vending machine invented in 1947 and widely distributed since the 1950s.[137]
Economics
Main article: Economics of coffee
Green coffee production
2023, millions of tonnes  Brazil 	3.41
 Vietnam 	1.96
 Indonesia 	0.76
 Colombia 	0.68
 Ethiopia 	0.56
World 	11.06
Source: FAOSTAT of the United Nations[138]
World production

In 2023, world production of green coffee beans was 11 million tonnes, led by Brazil with 31% of the total and Vietnam as a secondary producer (table).
Commodity market
Coffee prices 1973–2022
Coffee retailing
Bag of coffee beans
Bag with ziplock and one-way valve to prevent mold

Coffee is bought and sold as green coffee beans by roasters, investors, and price speculators as a tradable commodity in commodity markets and exchange-traded funds. Coffee futures contracts for Grade 3 washed arabicas are traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange under ticker symbol KC, with contract deliveries occurring every year in March, May, July, September, and December.[139][140][141][142] Higher and lower grade arabica coffees are sold through other channels. Futures contracts for robusta coffee are traded on the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange and, since 2007, on the New York Intercontinental Exchange.[143]

Dating to the 1970s, coffee has been incorrectly described by many, including historian Mark Pendergrast, as the world's "second most legally traded commodity".[144][145] Instead, "coffee was the second most valuable commodity exported by developing countries," from 1970 to circa 2000.[146] This fact was derived from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Commodity Yearbooks which show "Third World" commodity exports by value in the period 1970–1998 with crude oil in first place, coffee in second, followed by sugar, cotton, and others. Coffee continues to be an important commodity export for developing countries, but more recent figures are not readily available due to the shifting and politicized nature of the category "developing country".[144] Coffee is one of seven commodities included in the EU Regulation on Deforestation-free products (EUDR), which aims to guarantee that the products European Union (EU) citizens consume do not contribute to deforestation or forest degradation worldwide.[147]

International Coffee Day, which is claimed to have originated in Japan in 1983 with an event organized by the All Japan Coffee Association, takes place on 29 September in several countries.[148] There are numerous trade associations and lobbying and other organizations representing the coffee industry.[149][150]
Consumption
Coffee consumption (kg. per capita and year)

Nordic countries are the highest coffee-consuming nations when measured per capita per year, with consumption in Finland as the world's highest.[151]

    Finland – 26.45 lb (12.00 kg)
    Norway – 21.82 lb (9.90 kg)
    Iceland – 19.84 lb (9.00 kg)
    Denmark – 19.18 lb (8.70 kg)
    Netherlands – 18.52 lb (8.40 kg)
    Sweden – 18.00 lb (8.16 kg)
    Switzerland – 17.42 lb (7.90 kg)
    Belgium – 15.00 lb (6.80 kg)
    Luxembourg – 14.33 lb (6.50 kg)
    Canada – 14.33 lb (6.50 kg)

United States

An April 2024, National Coffee Association survey indicated that coffee consumption in the U.S. reached a 20-year high, with 67% of U.S. adults reporting drinking coffee in the past day. This is a significant increase compared to 2004 when fewer than half of U.S. adults reported coffee consumption in the past day. Drip coffee remains the most popular brewing method, but espresso-based beverages, particularly lattes, espresso shots, and cappuccinos, gained popularity.[152]
Economic impacts
Further information: List of countries by coffee production
Map of coffee areas in Brazil

Market volatility, and thus increased returns, during 1830 encouraged Brazilian entrepreneurs to shift their attention from gold to coffee, a crop hitherto reserved for local consumption. Concurrent with this shift was the commissioning of vital infrastructures, including approximately 7,000 km (4,300 mi) of railroads between 1860 and 1885. The creation of these railways enabled the importation of workers, to meet the enormous need for labor. This development primarily affected the State of Rio de Janeiro, as well as the Southern States of Brazil, most notably São Paulo, due to its favorable climate, soils, and terrain.[153]

Coffee production attracted immigrants in search of better economic opportunities in the early 1900s. Mainly, these were Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, and Japanese nationals. For instance, São Paulo received approximately 733,000 immigrants in the decade preceding 1900, whilst only receiving approximately 201,000 immigrants in the six years to 1890. The production yield of coffee increases. In 1880, São Paulo produced 1.2 million bags (25% of total production), in 1888 2.6 million (40%), and in 1902 8 million bags (60%).[154] Coffee is then 63% of the country's exports. The gains made by this trade allow sustained economic growth in the country.

The four years between planting a coffee and the first harvest extend seasonal variations in the price of coffee. The Brazilian Government is thus forced, to some extent, to keep strong price subsidies during production periods.
Fair trade
Main article: Fair trade coffee
See also: Fair trade debate

The concept of fair trade labeling, which guarantees coffee growers a negotiated preharvest price, began in the late 1980s with the Max Havelaar Foundation's labeling program in the Netherlands. In 2004, 24,222 metric tons (of 7,050,000 produced worldwide) were fair trade; in 2005, 33,991 metric tons out of 6,685,000 were fair trade, an increase from 0.34% to 0.51%.[155][156] A number of fair trade impact studies have shown that fair trade coffee produces a mixed impact on the communities that grow it. Many studies are skeptical about fair trade, reporting that it often worsens the bargaining power of those who are not part of it. The first fair-trade coffee was an effort to import Guatemalan coffee into Europe as "Indio Solidarity Coffee".[157]

Since the founding of organizations such as the European Fair Trade Association (1987), the production and consumption of fair trade coffee has grown as some local and national coffee chains started to offer fair trade alternatives.[158] For example, in April 2000, after a year-long campaign by the human rights organization Global Exchange, Starbucks decided to carry fair-trade coffee in its stores.[159] Since September 2009 all Starbucks Espresso beverages in UK and Ireland are made with Fairtrade and Shared Planet certified coffee.[160]

A 2005 study done in Belgium concluded that consumers' buying behavior is not consistent with their positive attitude toward ethical products. On average 46% of European consumers claimed to be willing to pay substantially more for ethical products, including fair-trade products such as coffee. The study found that the majority of respondents were unwilling to pay the actual price premium of 27% for fair trade coffee.[159]
Specialty coffee and new trading relationships

Specialty coffee has driven a desire for more traceable coffee, and as such businesses are offering coffees that may come from a single origin, or a single lot from a single farm. This can give rise to the roaster developing a relationship with the producer, to discuss and collaborate on coffee. The roaster may also choose to cut out the importers and exporters to directly trade with the producer, or they may "fairly trade", where any third-parties involved in the transaction are thought to have added value, and there is a high level of transparency around the price, although often there is no certification to back it up.[161] This process tends to only be done for high-quality products since keeping the coffee separate from other coffees adds costs, and so only coffee that roasters believe can command a higher price will be kept separate.[162]

Some coffee is sold through internet auction – much of it is sold through a competition, with coffees passing through local and international jurors, and then the best coffees being selected to be bid on. Some estates known for high-quality coffee also sell their coffee through an online auction. This can lead to increased price transparency since the final price paid is usually published.[161]
Composition

Brewed coffee made from typical grounds and tap water is 99.4% water and contains 40 mg of caffeine per 100 ml with no essential nutrients in significant content.[163] Restaurant-brewed espresso is 97.8% water and contains some dietary minerals, B vitamins, and 212 mg of caffeine per 100 ml.[164]

Although coffee polyphenols, particularly chlorogenic acid, are present in coffee,[165] there is no evidence that coffee polyphenols impart a health benefit or have antioxidant value following ingestion.[166][167] Overall, coffee components do not pose risks to health, and do not provide health effects for adults consuming about 3-4 cups per day, which would supply 300-400 mg of caffeine per day.[166]
Pharmacology
Main articles: List of chemical compounds in coffee and Health effects of coffee
Skeletal formula of a caffeine molecule

A psychoactive chemical in coffee is caffeine, an adenosine receptor antagonist that is known for its stimulant effects.[166][168] Coffee also contains the monoamine oxidase inhibitors β-carboline and harmane, which may contribute to its psychoactivity.[169] In a healthy liver, caffeine is mostly metabolized by liver enzymes. The excreted metabolites are mostly paraxanthines—theobromine and theophylline—and a small amount of unchanged caffeine. Therefore, the metabolism of caffeine depends on the state of this enzymatic system of the liver.[166][170]

Coffee has laxative effects, inducing defecation in some people within minutes of consumption.[171][172][173][174] The specific mechanism of action and chemical constituents responsible are still unknown, but caffeine is likely not responsible.[175]

A 2017 review of clinical trials found that drinking coffee is generally safe within usual levels of intake and is more likely to improve health outcomes than to cause harm at doses of 3-4 cups of coffee daily. Exceptions include possible increased risk in women having bone fractures, and a possible increased risk in pregnant women of fetal loss or decreased birth weight. Results were complicated by poor study quality, and differences in age, gender, health status, and serving size.[176]
Caffeine content
See also: Low caffeine coffee

Depending on the type of coffee and method of preparation, the caffeine content of a single serving can vary greatly.[177][178] The caffeine content of a cup of coffee varies depending mainly on the brewing method, and also on the coffee variety, such as 40 mg per 100 ml in regular coffee and 212 mg per 100 ml in espresso.[163][164] According to a 1979 analysis, coffee has the following caffeine content, depending on how it is prepared:[177]
	Serving size 	Caffeine content
Brewed 	200 mL (7 US fl oz) 	80–135 mg
Drip 	200 mL (7 US fl oz) 	115–175 mg
Espresso 	45–60 mL (1+1⁄2–2 US fl oz) 	100 mg

Caffeine remains stable up to 200 °C (392 °F) and completely decomposes around 285 °C (545 °F).[179] Given that roasting temperatures do not exceed 200 °C (392 °F) for long and rarely if ever reach 285 °C (545 °F), the caffeine content of a coffee is not likely changed much by the roasting process.[180]
Society and culture
Main article: Coffee culture
See also: Coffee culture in Australia and Coffee culture in former Yugoslavia

Coffee is often consumed alongside (or instead of) breakfast by many at home or when eating out at diners or cafeterias. It is often served at the end of a formal meal, normally with a dessert, and at times with an after-dinner mint, especially when consumed at a restaurant or dinner party.[181]
Coffeehouses
Main article: Coffeehouse
Coffee is an important part of Bosnian culture, and was a major part of its economy in the past.[182]

Widely known as coffeehouses or cafés, establishments serving prepared coffee or other hot beverages have existed for over five hundred years. The first coffeehouse in Constantinople was opened in 1475 by traders arriving from Damascus and Aleppo.[183]

A contemporary term for a person who makes coffee beverages, often a coffeehouse employee, is a barista. The Specialty Coffee Association of Europe and the Specialty Coffee Association of America have been influential in setting standards and providing training.[184]
Break

The coffee break in the United States and elsewhere is a short mid-morning rest period granted to employees. It originated in the late 19th century in Stoughton, Wisconsin, with the wives of Norwegian immigrants. The city celebrates this every year with the Stoughton Coffee Break Festival.[185] In 1951, Time noted that "[s]ince the war, the coffee break has been written into union contracts".[186] The term subsequently became common through a Pan-American Coffee Bureau ad campaign of 1952 which urged consumers, "Give yourself a Coffee-Break – and Get What Coffee Gives to You."[187] John B. Watson, a behavioral psychologist who worked with Maxwell House later in his career, helped to popularize coffee breaks within the American culture.[188]
Prohibition and condemnation
The Coffee Bearer, Cairo, an Orientalist painting by John Frederick Lewis (1857)

Historically, several religious groups have prohibited or condemned the consumption of coffee. The permissibility of coffee was debated in the Islamic world during the early 16th century, variously being permitted or prohibited until it was ultimately accepted by the 1550s.[189] Contention existed among Ashkenazi Jews as to whether coffee was acceptable for Passover until it was certified kosher in 1923.[190] Some Christian groups, such as Mormons and Seventh-day Adventists, discourage the consumption of coffee.[191][192] Some Rastafarians also generally avoid coffee.[193]

Furthermore, coffee has been prohibited for political and economic reasons. King Charles II of England briefly outlawed coffeehouses to quell perceived rebellion.[30] King Frederick the Great banned it in Prussia, concerned about the price of importing of coffee without production colonies.[194][195] Sweden prohibited coffee in the 18th century for the same reasons.[196] Coffee has seldom been prohibited based on its intoxicating effect.[197]
Folklore and culture
"Cup of joe" redirects here. For other uses, see Cup of Joe (disambiguation).

There are many stories about coffee and its impact on people and society. The Oromo people would customarily plant a coffee tree on the graves of powerful sorcerers. They believed that the first coffee bush sprang up from the tears that the god of heaven shed over the corpse of a dead sorcerer.[198] Johann Sebastian Bach was inspired to compose the humorous Coffee Cantata, about dependence on the beverage, which was controversial in the early 18th century.[199]

In the United States, coffee is sometimes called a "cup of Joe". The origin of this phrase is in dispute; a common story is that in World War I the US Secretary of the Navy Josephus "Joe" Daniels banned alcohol on navy ships which meant that the strongest drink available aboard the ship was black coffee. Sailors began referring to coffee as a "cup of Joe" in reference to Daniels. However, this story may be apocryphal since the first written account of it was in 1930, some 15 years later. Another explanation is that a formerly popular nickname for coffee, jamoke, from mocha java, was shortened to Joe. A third origin story is that since coffee is such a commonly consumed beverage, it is the drink of the average Joe.[200][201][202]

A coffee bean is a seed from the Coffea plant and the source for coffee. It is the pit inside the red or purple fruit. This fruit is often referred to as a coffee cherry, and like the cherry, it is a fruit with a pit. Even though the coffee beans are not technically beans, they are referred to as such because of their resemblance to true beans. The fruits most commonly contain two stones with their flat sides together. A small percentage of cherries contain a single seed, called a "peaberry". Peaberries make up only around 10% to 15% of all coffee beans. It is a fairly common belief that they have more flavour than normal coffee beans.[3] Like Brazil nuts (a seed) and white rice, coffee beans consist mostly of endosperm.[4]

The two most economically important varieties of coffee plants are the Arabica and the Robusta; approximately 60% of the coffee produced worldwide is Arabica and ~40% is Robusta.[5] Arabica beans consist of 0.8–1.4% caffeine and Robusta beans consist of 1.7–4.0% caffeine.[6] As coffee is one of the world's most widely consumed beverages, coffee beans are a major cash crop and an important export product, accounting for over 50% of some developing nations' foreign exchange earnings.[7] In 2017, 70% of total coffee production was exported, worth US$19.9 billion.[8] The global coffee industry is massive and valued at $495.50 billion as of 2023, the biggest producer of coffee and coffee beans is Brazil.[9] Other main exporters of coffee beans are Colombia, Vietnam and Ethiopia.
History
Main article: History of coffee
Significant dates

    According to legend, the coffee plant was discovered in Ethiopia by a goat herder named Kaldi around 850 AD, who observed increased physical activity in his goats after they consumed coffee beans.[10]
    The coffee plant was first found in the mountains of Yemen. Then by 1500, it was exported to the rest of the world through the port of Mokha, Yemen.
    First cultivation in India (Chikmagalur) – 1600
    First cultivation in Europe – 1616
    First cultivation in Java – 1699
    First cultivation in Caribbean (Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Puerto Rico) – 1715–1730
    First cultivation in Dutch East Indies – 1720
    First cultivation in South America – 1730
    Roasted beans first sold on retail market (Pittsburgh) – 1865
    Important spray-drying techniques developed in 1950s, which along with freeze drying are a method to create instant coffee

Distribution
The bean belt in yellow: The 20 largest producers (2011) are in green.

Brazil produces about 45% of the world's total coffee exports. The United States imports more coffee than any other nation. As of 2015, Americans consumed approximately 400 million cups of coffee per day, making the United States the leading consumer of coffee in the world.[11]

Coffee plants grow within a defined area between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, termed the bean belt or coffee belt.[12][13][14][15]
Etymology

The Oxford English Dictionary suggests that the European languages generally appear to have adopted the name from Turkish kahveh, about 1600, perhaps through Italian caffè. Arab qahwah, in Turkish pronounced kahveh, the name of the infusion or beverage; said by Arab lexicographers to have originally meant "wine" or some type of wine, and to be a derivative of a verb-root qahiya "to have no appetite". Another common theory is that the name derives from Kaffa Province, Ethiopia, where the species may have originated.[16]
Coffee plant
The flower of a Singararutang coffee tree
Coffee berries

The coffee tree averages from 5–10 m (16–33 ft) in height. As the tree gets older, it produces less fruit and slowly loses any pest- and disease-resistance. The coffee beans come from the seeds which contained in fruits from trees and shrubs naturally grown in African forests. Humans produce coffee by roasting, grinding and brewing the green coffee beans.[17]

Coffee plants are often grown in rows spaced apart depending on the desired density chosen by the farmer. Some farmers plant other trees, such as shade trees or other cash-crop trees, such as orange trees around them or plant the coffee on the sides of hills, because they need specific conditions to flourish. Ideally, Arabica coffee beans are grown at temperatures between 15 and 24 °C (59 and 75 °F) and Robusta between 24 and 30 °C (75 and 86 °F) and receive between 500 and 3,000 mm (20 and 118 in) of rainfall per year.[18] More rain is needed at the beginning of the season when the fruit is developing and less later in the season as it ripens.

Two lesser known species grown for consumption are Coffea liberica and Coffea racemosa.[19]
Processing
Further information: Processing of coffee

When the fruit is ripe, it is almost always handpicked, using either "selective picking", where only the ripe fruit is removed, or "strip-picking", where all of the fruit is removed from a limb all at once. Selective picking is often used to produce higher quality coffee because the cherries are picked at their ripest. Strip-picking is indiscriminate and will harvest unripe, ripe, and over-ripe fruit. To improve quality after strip-picking, the harvest must be sorted.

Two methods are primarily used to process coffee berries. The first, "wet" or "washed" process, has historically usually been carried out in Central America and areas of Africa. The flesh of the cherries is separated from the seeds and then the seeds are fermented – soaked in water for about two days. This softens the mucilage, which is a sticky pulp residue that is still attached to the seeds. Then this mucilage is washed off with water.

The "dry processing" method, cheaper and simpler, was historically used for lower-quality beans in Brazil and much of Africa, but now brings a premium when done well. Twigs and other foreign objects are separated from the berries and the fruit is then spread out in the sun on concrete, bricks or raised beds for 2–3 weeks, turned regularly for even drying.

In Asia a third type of processing exists, where the Asian palm civet eats coffee berries and excretes the beans. Because the civet prefers the taste of the ripest cherries, the civet selectively harvests the cherries. Its digestive system then processes the beans by breaking down the mucilage and pulp surrounding the seed. Once the seeds are excreted by the civet, they can be harvested, processed and sold as a niche product. Once they are finally processed, these beans are called kopi luwak, and are often marketed as a rare and expensive coffee.
Composition
Coffee cherry cross-section
Freshly harvested coffee cherries
Freshly harvested coffee cherries

The term "green coffee bean" refers to unroasted mature or immature coffee beans. These have been processed by wet or dry methods to remove the outer pulp and mucilage and have an intact wax layer on the outer surface. When immature, they are green. When mature, they have a brown to yellow or reddish color and typically weigh 300 to 330 mg per dried coffee bean. Nonvolatile and volatile compounds in green coffee beans, such as caffeine, deter many insects and animals from eating them. Further, both nonvolatile and volatile compounds contribute to the flavor of the coffee bean when it is roasted. Nonvolatile nitrogenous compounds (including alkaloids, trigonelline, proteins, and free amino acids) and carbohydrates are of major importance in producing the full aroma of roasted coffee and for its biological action. Since the mid-2000s, green coffee extract has been sold as a nutritional supplement and has been clinically studied for its chlorogenic acid content and for its lipolytic and weight-loss properties.
Nonvolatile alkaloids
Immature Coffea canephora berries on a tree in Goa, India

Caffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) is the alkaloid most present in green and roasted coffee beans. The content of caffeine is between 1.0% and 2.5% by weight of dry green coffee beans. The content of caffeine does not change during maturation of green coffee beans, but higher caffeine content is found in plants grown at higher altitudes.[20][21] Lower concentrations of theophylline, theobromine, paraxanthine, liberine, and methylliberine can be found. The concentration of theophylline, an alkaloid noted for its presence in green tea, is reduced during the roasting process, usually about 15 minutes at 230 °C (446 °F), whereas the concentrations of most other alkaloids are not changed.[citation needed] The solubility of caffeine in water increases with temperature and with the addition of chlorogenic acids, citric acid, or tartaric acid, all of which are present in green coffee beans. For example, 1 g (0.035 oz) of caffeine dissolves in 46 mL (1.6 US fl oz) of water at room temperature, and 5.5 mL (0.19 US fl oz) at 80 °C (176 °F).[22] The xanthine alkaloids are odorless, but have a bitter taste in water, which is masked by organic acids present in green coffee.[citation needed]

Trigonelline (N-methyl-nicotinate) is a derivative of vitamin B3 that is not as bitter as caffeine. In green coffee beans, the content is between 0.6% and 1.0%. At a roasting temperature of 230 °C (446 °F), 85% of the trigonelline is degraded to nicotinic acid, leaving small amounts of the unchanged molecule in the roasted beans.[23][24]
Proteins and amino acids

Proteins account for 8% to 12% of dried green coffee beans. A majority of the proteins are of the 11-S storage kind[25] (alpha – component of 32 kDa, beta – component of 22 kDa), most of which are degraded to free amino acids during maturation of green coffee beans. Further, 11-S storage proteins are degraded to their individual amino acids under roasting temperature, thus are an additional source of bitter components due to generation of Maillard reaction products.[26] High temperature and oxygen concentration and low pH degrade 11-S storage proteins of green coffee beans to low-molecular-weight peptides and amino acids. The degradation is accelerated in the presence of organic acids such as chlorogenic acids and their derivatives. Other proteins include enzymes, such as catalase and polyphenol oxidase, which are important for the maturation of green coffee beans. Mature coffee contains free amino acids (4.0 mg amino acid/g robusta coffee and up to 4.5 mg amino acid/g arabica coffee). In Coffea arabica, alanine is the amino acid with the highest concentration, i.e. 1.2 mg/g, followed by asparagine of 0.66 mg/g, whereas in C. robusta, alanine is present at a concentration of 0.8 mg/g and asparagine at 0.36 mg/g.[27][28] The free hydrophobic amino acids in fresh green coffee beans contribute to the unpleasant taste, making it impossible to prepare a desirable beverage with such compounds. In fresh green coffee from Peru, these concentrations have been determined as: isoleucine 81 mg/kg, leucine 100 mg/kg, valine 93 mg/kg, tyrosine 81 mg/kg, phenylalanine 133 mg/kg. The concentration of gamma-aminobutyric acid (a neurotransmitter) has been determined between 143 mg/kg and 703 mg/kg in green coffee beans from Tanzania.[29] Roasted coffee beans do not contain any free amino acids; the amino acids in green coffee beans are degraded under roasting temperature to Maillard products (reaction products between the aldehyde group of sugar and the alpha-amino group of the amino acids). Further, diketopiperazines, e.g. cyclo(proline-proline), cyclo(proline-leucine), and cyclo(proline-isoleucine), are generated from the corresponding amino acids, and are the major source of the bitter taste of roasted coffee.[30] The bitter flavor of diketopiperazines is perceptible at around 20 mg/liter of water. The content of diketopiperazines in espresso is about 20 to 30 mg, which is responsible for its bitterness.[31]
Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates make up about 50% of the dry weight of green coffee beans. The carbohydrate fraction of green coffee is dominated by polysaccharides, such as arabinogalactan, galactomannan, and cellulose, contributing to the tasteless flavor of green coffee. Arabinogalactan makes up to 17% of dry weight of green coffee beans, with a molecular weight of 90 kDa to 200 kDa. It is composed of beta-1-3-linked galactan main chains, with frequent members of arabinose (pentose) and galactose (hexose) residues at the side chains comprising immunomodulating properties by stimulating the cellular defense system (Th-1 response) of the body. Mature brown to yellow coffee beans contain fewer residues of galactose and arabinose at the side chain of the polysaccharides, making the green coffee bean more resistant to physical breakdown and less soluble in water.[32] The molecular weight of the arabinogalactan in coffee is higher than in most other plants, improving the cellular defense system of the digestive tract compared to arabinogalactan with lower molecular weight.[33] Free monosaccharides are present in mature brown to yellow-green coffee beans. The free part of monosaccharides contains sucrose (gluco-fructose) up to 9000 mg/100 g of arabica green coffee bean, a lower amount in robustas, i.e. 4500 mg/100 g. In arabica green coffee beans, the content of free glucose was 30 to 38 mg/100 g, free fructose 23 to 30 mg/100 g; free galactose 35 mg/100 g and mannitol 50 mg/100 g dried coffee beans, respectively. Mannitol is a powerful scavenger for hydroxyl radicals, which are generated during the peroxidation of lipids in biological membranes.[34]
Lipids

The lipids found in green coffee include: linoleic acid, palmitic acid, oleic acid, stearic acid, arachidic acid, diterpenes, triglycerides, unsaturated long-chain fatty acids, esters, and amides. The total content of lipids in dried green coffee is 11.7–14 g/100 g.[35] Lipids are present on the surface and in the interior matrix of green coffee beans. On the surface, they include derivatives of carboxylic acid-5-hydroxytryptamides with an amide bond to fatty acids (unsaturated C6 to C24) making up to 3% of total lipid content or 1200 to 1400 microgram/g dried green coffee bean. Such compounds form a wax-like cover on the surface of the coffee bean (200–300 mg lipids/100 g dried green coffee bean) protecting the interior matrix against oxidation and insects. Further, such molecules have antioxidative activity due to their chemical structure.[36] Lipids of the interior tissue are triglycerides, linoleic acid (46% of total free lipids), palmitic acid (30% to 35% of total free lipids), and esters. Arabica beans have a higher content of lipids (13.5–17.4 g lipids/100 g dried green coffee beans) than robustas (9.8–10.7 g lipids/100 g dried green coffee beans). The content of diterpenes is about 20% of the lipid fraction. The diterpenes found in green coffee include cafestol, kahweol and 16-O-methylcafestol. Some of these diterpenes have been shown in in vitro experiments to protect liver tissue against chemical oxidation.[37] In coffee oil from green coffee beans the diterpenes are esterified with saturated long chain fatty acids.
Nonvolatile chlorogenic acids

Chlorogenic acids belong to a group of compounds known as phenolic acids, which are antioxidants. The content of chlorogenic acids in dried green coffee beans of arabica is 65 mg/g and of robusta 140 mg/g, depending on the timing of harvesting.[38] At roasting temperature, more than 70% of chlorogenic acids are destroyed, leaving a residue less than 30 mg/g in the roasted coffee bean. In contrast to green coffee, green tea contains an average of 85 mg/g polyphenols. These chlorogenic acids could be a valuable, inexpensive source of antioxidants. Chlorogenic acids are homologous compounds comprising caffeic acid, ferulic acid and 3,4-dimethoxycinnamic acid, which are connected by an ester bond to the hydroxyl groups of quinic acid.[39] The antioxidant capacity of chlorogenic acid is more potent than of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) or mannitol, which is a selective hydroxy-radical scavenger.[40] Chlorogenic acids have a bitter taste in low concentrations such as 50 mg/L water. At higher concentrations of 1 g/L water, they have a sour taste. Chlorogenic acids increase the solubility of caffeine and are important modulators of taste.
Volatile compounds

Volatile compounds of green coffee beans include short-chain fatty acids, aldehydes, and nitrogen-containing aromatic molecules, such as derivatives of pyrazines (green-herbaceous-earthy odor). Briefly, such volatile compounds are responsible for the less pleasing odor and taste of green coffee versus roasted coffee. Commercial success was realized by Starbucks in creating Green Bean Refreshers using a process that primarily isolates the caffeine from the green beans but does not actually use steeped liquid from the beans.[41] Many consumers experiment with creating green bean "extract" by steeping green coffee beans in hot water. Often, the recommended times of steeping (20 minutes to 1 hour) extract too much caffeine to provide a pleasant taste. A steeping time of 12 minutes or under provides a more palatable liquid that can be used as a base for a drink containing more of the nutrients and less caffeine that using just isolated caffeine extract.[42] The alkaline stock base that results can be paired with acidic or fruity extracts, with or without sweetener, to mask the vegetable-like taste of the extract.

When green coffee beans are roasted, other molecules with the typical pleasant aroma of coffee are generated, which are not present in fresh green coffee. During roasting, the major part of the unpleasant-tasting volatile compounds are neutralised. Unfortunately, other important molecules such as antioxidants and vitamins present in green coffee are destroyed. Volatile compounds with nauseating odor for humans have been identified, including acetic acid (pungent, unpleasant odor), propionic acid (odor of sour milk, or butter), butanoic acid (odor of rancid butter, present in green coffee with 2 mg/100 g coffee beans), pentanoic acid (unpleasant fruity flavor, present in green coffee at 40 mg/100 g in coffee beans), hexanoic acid (fatty-rancid odor), heptanoic acid (fatty odor), octanoic acid (repulsive oily rancid odor); nonanoic acid (mild nut-like fatty odor); decanoic acid (sour repulsive odor), and derivatives of such fatty acids – 3-methyl-valeric acid (sour, green-herbaceous, unpleasant odor), acetaldehyde (pungent-nauseating odor, even when highly diluted, present in dried green coffee beans at concentrations of about 5 mg/kg), propanal (choking effect on respiratory system, penetrating-nauseating), butanal (nauseating effect, present in dried green coffee beans at 2–7 mg/kg), or pentanal (very repulsive nauseating effect).[43] 
Caffeine is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant of the methylxanthine class and is the most commonly consumed psychoactive substance globally.[9][10] It is mainly used for its eugeroic (wakefulness promoting), ergogenic (physical performance-enhancing), or nootropic (cognitive-enhancing) properties.[11][12] Caffeine acts by blocking binding of adenosine at a number of adenosine receptor types, inhibiting the centrally depressant effects of adenosine and enhancing the release of acetylcholine.[13] Caffeine has a three-dimensional structure similar to that of adenosine, which allows it to bind and block its receptors.[14] Caffeine also increases cyclic AMP levels through nonselective inhibition of phosphodiesterase, increases calcium release from intracellular stores, and antagonizes GABA receptors, although these mechanisms typically occur at concentrations beyond usual human consumption.[10][15]

Caffeine is a bitter, white crystalline purine, a methylxanthine alkaloid, and is chemically related to the adenine and guanine bases of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). It is found in the seeds, fruits, nuts, or leaves of a number of plants native to Africa, East Asia and South America[16] and helps to protect them against herbivores and from competition by preventing the germination of nearby seeds,[17] as well as encouraging consumption by select animals such as honey bees.[18] The best-known source of caffeine is the coffee bean, the seed of the Coffea plant. People may drink beverages containing caffeine to relieve or prevent drowsiness and to improve cognitive performance. To make these drinks, caffeine is extracted by steeping the plant product in water, a process called infusion. Caffeine-containing drinks, such as coffee, tea, and cola, are consumed globally in high volumes. In 2020, almost 10 million tonnes of coffee beans were consumed globally.[19] Caffeine is the world's most widely consumed psychoactive drug.[20][21] Unlike most other psychoactive substances, caffeine remains largely unregulated and legal in nearly all parts of the world. Caffeine is also an outlier as its use is seen as socially acceptable in most cultures with it even being encouraged.

Caffeine has both positive and negative health effects. It can treat and prevent the premature infant breathing disorders bronchopulmonary dysplasia of prematurity and apnea of prematurity. Caffeine citrate is on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines.[22] It may confer a modest protective effect against some diseases,[23] including Parkinson's disease.[24] Some people experience sleep disruption or anxiety if they consume caffeine,[25] but others show little disturbance. Evidence of a risk during pregnancy is equivocal; some authorities recommend that pregnant women limit caffeine to the equivalent of two cups of coffee per day or less.[26][27] Caffeine can produce a mild form of drug dependence – associated with withdrawal symptoms such as sleepiness, headache, and irritability – when an individual stops using caffeine after repeated daily intake.[28][29][2] Tolerance to the autonomic effects of increased blood pressure and heart rate, and increased urine output, develops with chronic use (i.e., these symptoms become less pronounced or do not occur following consistent use).[30]

Caffeine is classified by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as generally recognized as safe. Toxic doses, over 10 grams per day for an adult, are much higher than the typical dose of under 500 milligrams per day.[31] The European Food Safety Authority reported that up to 400 mg of caffeine per day (around 5.7 mg/kg of body mass per day) does not raise safety concerns for non-pregnant adults, while intakes up to 200 mg per day for pregnant and lactating women do not raise safety concerns for the fetus or the breast-fed infants.[32] A cup of coffee contains 80–175 mg of caffeine, depending on what "bean" (seed) is used, how it is roasted, and how it is prepared (e.g., drip, percolation, or espresso).[33] Thus it requires roughly 50–100 ordinary cups of coffee to reach the toxic dose. However, pure powdered caffeine, which is available as a dietary supplement, can be lethal in tablespoon-sized amounts.
Uses
Medical
Main article: Caffeine citrate

Caffeine is used for both prevention[34] and treatment[35] of bronchopulmonary dysplasia in premature infants. It may improve weight gain during therapy[36] and reduce the incidence of cerebral palsy as well as reduce language and cognitive delay.[37][38] On the other hand, subtle long-term side effects are possible.[39]

Caffeine is used as a primary treatment for apnea of prematurity,[40] but not prevention.[41][42] It is also used for orthostatic hypotension treatment.[43][42][44]

Some people use caffeine-containing beverages such as coffee or tea to try to treat their asthma.[45] Evidence to support this practice is poor.[45] It appears that caffeine in low doses improves airway function in people with asthma, increasing forced expiratory volume (FEV1) by 5% to 18% for up to four hours.[46]

The addition of caffeine (100–130 mg) to commonly prescribed pain relievers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen modestly improves the proportion of people who achieve pain relief.[47]

Consumption of caffeine after abdominal surgery shortens the time to recovery of normal bowel function and shortens length of hospital stay.[48]

Caffeine was formerly used as a second-line treatment for ADHD. It is considered less effective than methylphenidate or amphetamine but more so than placebo for children with ADHD.[49][50] Children, adolescents, and adults with ADHD are more likely to consume caffeine, perhaps as a form of self-medication.[50][51]
Enhancing performance
Cognitive performance

Caffeine is a central nervous system stimulant that may reduce fatigue and drowsiness.[9] At normal doses, caffeine has variable effects on learning and memory, but it generally improves reaction time, wakefulness, concentration, and motor coordination.[52][53] The amount of caffeine needed to produce these effects varies from person to person, depending on body size and degree of tolerance.[52] The desired effects arise approximately one hour after consumption, and the desired effects of a moderate dose usually subside after about three or four hours.[4]

Caffeine can delay or prevent sleep and improves task performance during sleep deprivation.[54] Shift workers who use caffeine make fewer mistakes that could result from drowsiness.[55]

Caffeine in a dose dependent manner increases alertness in both fatigued and normal individuals.[56]

A systematic review and meta-analysis from 2014 found that concurrent caffeine and L-theanine use has synergistic psychoactive effects that promote alertness, attention, and task switching;[57] these effects are most pronounced during the first hour post-dose.[57]
Physical performance

Caffeine is a proven ergogenic aid in humans.[58] Caffeine improves athletic performance in aerobic (especially endurance sports) and anaerobic conditions.[58] Moderate doses of caffeine (around 5 mg/kg[58]) can improve sprint performance,[59] cycling and running time trial performance,[58] endurance (i.e., it delays the onset of muscle fatigue and central fatigue),[58][60][61] and cycling power output.[58] Caffeine increases basal metabolic rate in adults.[62][63][64] Caffeine ingestion prior to aerobic exercise increases fat oxidation, particularly in persons with low physical fitness.[65]

Caffeine improves muscular strength and power,[66] and may enhance muscular endurance.[67] Caffeine also enhances performance on anaerobic tests.[68] Caffeine consumption before constant load exercise is associated with reduced perceived exertion. While this effect is not present during exercise-to-exhaustion exercise, performance is significantly enhanced. This is congruent with caffeine reducing perceived exertion, because exercise-to-exhaustion should end at the same point of fatigue.[69] Caffeine also improves power output and reduces time to completion in aerobic time trials,[70] an effect positively (but not exclusively) associated with longer duration exercise.[71]
Specific populations
Adults

For the general population of healthy adults, Health Canada advises a daily intake of no more than 400 mg.[72] This limit was found to be safe by a 2017 systematic review on caffeine toxicology.[73]
Children

In healthy children, moderate caffeine intake under 400 mg produces effects that are "modest and typically innocuous".[74][75] As early as six months old, infants can metabolize caffeine at the same rate as that of adults.[76] Higher doses of caffeine (>400 mg) can cause physiological, psychological and behavioral harm, particularly for children with psychiatric or cardiac conditions.[74] There is no evidence that coffee stunts a child's growth.[77] The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that caffeine consumption, particularly in the case of energy and sports drinks, is not appropriate for children and adolescents and should be avoided.[78] This recommendation is based on a clinical report released by American Academy of Pediatrics in 2011 with a review of 45 publications from 1994 to 2011 and includes inputs from various stakeholders (Pediatricians, Committee on nutrition, Canadian Pediatric Society, Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, Food and Drug Administration, Sports Medicine & Fitness committee, National Federations of High School Associations).[78] For children age 12 and under, Health Canada recommends a maximum daily caffeine intake of no more than 2.5 milligrams per kilogram of body weight. Based on average body weights of children, this translates to the following age-based intake limits:[72]
Age range 	Maximum recommended daily caffeine intake
4–6 	45 mg (slightly more than in 355 ml (12 fl. oz) of a typical caffeinated soft drink)
7–9 	62.5 mg
10–12 	85 mg (about 1⁄2 cup of coffee)
Adolescents

Health Canada has not developed advice for adolescents because of insufficient data. However, they suggest that daily caffeine intake for this age group be no more than 2.5 mg/kg body weight. This is because the maximum adult caffeine dose may not be appropriate for light-weight adolescents or for younger adolescents who are still growing. The daily dose of 2.5 mg/kg body weight would not cause adverse health effects in the majority of adolescent caffeine consumers. This is a conservative suggestion since older and heavier-weight adolescents may be able to consume adult doses of caffeine without experiencing adverse effects.[72]
Pregnancy and breastfeeding

The metabolism of caffeine is reduced in pregnancy, especially in the third trimester, and the half-life of caffeine during pregnancy can be increased up to 15 hours (as compared to 2.5 to 4.5 hours in non-pregnant adults).[79] Evidence regarding the effects of caffeine on pregnancy and for breastfeeding are inconclusive.[26] There is limited primary and secondary advice for, or against, caffeine use during pregnancy and its effects on the fetus or newborn.[26]

The UK Food Standards Agency has recommended that pregnant women should limit their caffeine intake, out of prudence, to less than 200 mg of caffeine a day – the equivalent of two cups of instant coffee, or one and a half to two cups of fresh coffee.[80] The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) concluded in 2010 that caffeine consumption is safe up to 200 mg per day in pregnant women.[27] For women who breastfeed, are pregnant, or may become pregnant, Health Canada recommends a maximum daily caffeine intake of no more than 300 mg, or a little over two 8 oz (237 mL) cups of coffee.[72] A 2017 systematic review on caffeine toxicology found evidence supporting that caffeine consumption up to 300 mg/day for pregnant women is generally not associated with adverse reproductive or developmental effect.[73]

There are conflicting reports in the scientific literature about caffeine use during pregnancy.[81] A 2011 review found that caffeine during pregnancy does not appear to increase the risk of congenital malformations, miscarriage or growth retardation even when consumed in moderate to high amounts.[82] Other reviews, however, concluded that there is some evidence that higher caffeine intake by pregnant women may be associated with a higher risk of giving birth to a low birth weight baby,[83] and may be associated with a higher risk of pregnancy loss.[84] A systematic review, analyzing the results of observational studies, suggests that women who consume large amounts of caffeine (greater than 300 mg/day) prior to becoming pregnant may have a higher risk of experiencing pregnancy loss.[85]
Adverse effects
Physiological

Caffeine in coffee and other caffeinated drinks can affect gastrointestinal motility and gastric acid secretion.[86][87][88] In postmenopausal women, high caffeine consumption can accelerate bone loss.[89][90] Caffeine, alongside other factors such as stress and fatigue, can also increase the pressure in various muscles, including the eyelids.[91]

Acute ingestion of caffeine in large doses (at least 250–300 mg, equivalent to the amount found in 2–3 cups of coffee or 5–8 cups of tea) results in a short-term stimulation of urine output in individuals who have been deprived of caffeine for a period of days or weeks.[92] This increase is due to both a diuresis (increase in water excretion) and a natriuresis (increase in saline excretion); it is mediated via proximal tubular adenosine receptor blockade.[93] The acute increase in urinary output may increase the risk of dehydration. However, chronic users of caffeine develop a tolerance to this effect and experience no increase in urinary output.[94][95][96]
Psychological

Minor undesired symptoms from caffeine ingestion not sufficiently severe to warrant a psychiatric diagnosis are common and include mild anxiety, jitteriness, insomnia, increased sleep latency, and reduced coordination.[52][97] Caffeine can have negative effects on anxiety disorders.[98] According to a 2011 literature review, caffeine use may induce anxiety and panic disorders in people with Parkinson's disease.[99] At high doses, typically greater than 300 mg, caffeine can both cause and worsen anxiety.[100] For some people, discontinuing caffeine use can significantly reduce anxiety.[101]

In moderate doses, caffeine has been associated with reduced symptoms of depression and lower suicide risk.[102] Two reviews indicate that increased consumption of coffee and caffeine may reduce the risk of depression.[103][104]

Some textbooks state that caffeine is a mild euphoriant,[105][106][107] while others state that it is not a euphoriant.[108][109]

Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder is a subclass of the DSM-5 diagnosis of substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder.[110]
Reinforcement disorders
Addiction

Whether caffeine can result in an addictive disorder depends on how addiction is defined. Compulsive caffeine consumption under any circumstances has not been observed, and caffeine is therefore not generally considered addictive.[111] Some diagnostic sources, such as the ICDM-9 and ICD-10, include a classification of caffeine addiction under a broader diagnostic model.[112] Some state that certain users can become addicted and therefore unable to decrease use even though they know there are negative health effects.[3][113]

Caffeine does not appear to be a reinforcing stimulus, and some degree of aversion may actually occur, with people preferring placebo over caffeine in a study on drug abuse liability published in an NIDA research monograph.[114] Some state that research does not provide support for an underlying biochemical mechanism for caffeine addiction.[28][115][116][117] Other research states it can affect the reward system.[118]

"Caffeine addiction" was added to the ICDM-9 and ICD-10. However, its addition was contested with claims that this diagnostic model of caffeine addiction is not supported by evidence.[28][119][120] The American Psychiatric Association's DSM-5 does not include the diagnosis of a caffeine addiction but proposes criteria for the disorder for more study.[110][121]
Dependence and withdrawal
Main articles: Caffeine dependence and Caffeine withdrawal
See also: Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, caffeine-induced sleep disorder, and caffeinism

Caffeine withdrawal can cause mild to clinically significant distress or impairment in daily functioning. The frequency at which this occurs is self-reported at 11%, but in lab tests only half of the people who report withdrawal actually experience it, casting doubt on many claims of dependence.[122] and most cases of caffeine withdrawal were 13% in the moderate sense. Moderately physical dependence and withdrawal symptoms may occur upon abstinence, with greater than 100 mg caffeine per day, although these symptoms last no longer than a day.[28] Some symptoms associated with psychological dependence may also occur during withdrawal.[2] The diagnostic criteria for caffeine withdrawal require a previous prolonged daily use of caffeine.[123] Following 24 hours of a marked reduction in consumption, a minimum of 3 of these signs or symptoms is required to meet withdrawal criteria: difficulty concentrating, depressed mood/irritability, flu-like symptoms, headache, and fatigue.[123] Additionally, the signs and symptoms must disrupt important areas of functioning and are not associated with effects of another condition.[123]

The ICD-11 includes caffeine dependence as a distinct diagnostic category, which closely mirrors the DSM-5's proposed set of criteria for "caffeine-use disorder".[121][124]  Caffeine use disorder refers to dependence on caffeine characterized by failure to control caffeine consumption despite negative physiological consequences.[121][124] The APA, which published the DSM-5, acknowledged that there was sufficient evidence in order to create a diagnostic model of caffeine dependence for the DSM-5, but they noted that the clinical significance of the disorder is unclear.[125] Due to this inconclusive evidence on clinical significance, the DSM-5 classifies caffeine-use disorder as a "condition for further study".[121]

Tolerance to the effects of caffeine occurs for caffeine-induced elevations in blood pressure and the subjective feelings of nervousness though the effects are not drastic. Sensitization, the process whereby effects become more prominent with use, may occur for positive effects such as feelings of alertness and wellbeing.[122] Tolerance varies for daily, regular caffeine users and high caffeine users. High doses of caffeine (750 to 1200 mg/day spread throughout the day) have been shown to produce complete tolerance to some, but not all of the effects of caffeine. Doses as low as 100 mg/day, such as a 6 oz (170 g) cup of coffee or two to three 12 oz (340 g) servings of caffeinated soft-drink, may continue to cause sleep disruption, among other intolerances. Non-regular caffeine users have the least caffeine tolerance for sleep disruption.[126] Some coffee drinkers develop tolerance to its undesired sleep-disrupting effects, but others apparently do not.[127]
Risk of other diseases
See also: Health effects of coffee

A neuroprotective effect of caffeine against Alzheimer's disease and dementia is possible but the evidence is inconclusive.[128][129]

Caffeine may lessen the severity of acute mountain sickness if taken a few hours prior to attaining a high altitude.[130] One meta analysis has found that caffeine consumption is associated with a reduced risk of type 2 diabetes.[131] Regular caffeine consumption may reduce the risk of developing Parkinson's disease and may slow the progression of Parkinson's disease.[132][133][24]

Caffeine increases intraocular pressure in those with glaucoma but does not appear to affect normal individuals.[134]

The DSM-5 also includes other caffeine-induced disorders consisting of caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, caffeine-induced sleep disorder and unspecified caffeine-related disorders. The first two disorders are classified under "Anxiety Disorder" and "Sleep-Wake Disorder" because they share similar characteristics. Other disorders that present with significant distress and impairment of daily functioning that warrant clinical attention but do not meet the criteria to be diagnosed under any specific disorders are listed under "Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorders".[135]
Energy crash

Caffeine is reputed to cause a fall in energy several hours after drinking, but this is not well researched.[136][137][138][139]
Overdose
[icon]	
This section needs expansion with: practical management of overdose, see PMID 30893206. You can help by adding to it. (November 2019)
Torso of a young man with overlaid text of main side-effects of caffeine overdose.
Primary symptoms of caffeine intoxication[140]

Consumption of 1–1.5 grams (1,000–1,500 mg) per day is associated with a condition known as caffeinism.[141] Caffeinism usually combines caffeine dependency with a wide range of unpleasant symptoms including nervousness, irritability, restlessness, insomnia, headaches, and palpitations after caffeine use.[142]

Caffeine overdose can result in a state of central nervous system overstimulation known as caffeine intoxication, a clinically significant temporary condition that develops during, or shortly after, the consumption of caffeine.[143] This syndrome typically occurs only after ingestion of large amounts of caffeine, well over the amounts found in typical caffeinated beverages and caffeine tablets (e.g., more than 400–500 mg at a time). According to the DSM-5, caffeine intoxication may be diagnosed if five (or more) of the following symptoms develop after recent consumption of caffeine: restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, flushed face, diuresis, gastrointestinal disturbance, muscle twitching, rambling flow of thought and speech, tachycardia or cardiac arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility, and psychomotor agitation.[144]

According to the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11), cases of very high caffeine intake (e.g. > 5 g) may result in caffeine intoxication with symptoms including mania, depression, lapses in judgment, disorientation, disinhibition, delusions, hallucinations or psychosis, and rhabdomyolysis.[143]
Energy drinks

High caffeine consumption in energy drinks (at least one liter or 320 mg of caffeine) was associated with short-term cardiovascular side effects including hypertension, prolonged QT interval, and heart palpitations. These cardiovascular side effects were not seen with smaller amounts of caffeine consumption in energy drinks (less than 200 mg).[79]
Severe intoxication

As of 2007 there is no known antidote or reversal agent for caffeine intoxication. Treatment of mild caffeine intoxication is directed toward symptom relief; severe intoxication may require peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, or hemofiltration.[140][145][146] Intralipid infusion therapy is indicated in cases of imminent risk of cardiac arrest in order to scavenge the free serum caffeine.[146]
Lethal dose

Death from caffeine ingestion appears to be rare, and most commonly caused by an intentional overdose of medications.[147] In 2016, 3702 caffeine-related exposures were reported to Poison Control Centers in the United States, of which 846 required treatment at a medical facility, and 16 had a major outcome; and several caffeine-related deaths are reported in case studies.[147] The LD50 of caffeine in rats is 192 milligrams per kilogram of body mass. The fatal dose in humans is estimated to be 150–200 milligrams per kilogram, which is 10.5–14 grams for a typical 70 kg (150 lb) adult, equivalent to about 75–100 cups of coffee.[148][149] There are cases where doses as low as 57 milligrams per kilogram have been fatal.[150] A number of fatalities have been caused by overdoses of readily available powdered caffeine supplements, for which the estimated lethal amount is less than a tablespoon.[151] The lethal dose is lower in individuals whose ability to metabolize caffeine is impaired due to genetics or chronic liver disease.[152] A death was reported in 2013 of a man with liver cirrhosis who overdosed on caffeinated mints.[153][154]
Interactions

Caffeine is a substrate for CYP1A2, and interacts with many substances through this and other mechanisms.[155]
Alcohol
See also: Caffeinated alcoholic drink

According to DSST, alcohol causes a decrease in performance on their standardized tests, and caffeine causes a significant improvement.[156] When alcohol and caffeine are consumed jointly, the effects of the caffeine are changed, but the alcohol effects remain the same.[157] For example, consuming additional caffeine does not reduce the effect of alcohol.[157] However, the jitteriness and alertness given by caffeine is decreased when additional alcohol is consumed.[157] Alcohol consumption alone reduces both inhibitory and activational aspects of behavioral control. Caffeine antagonizes the effect of alcohol on the activational aspect of behavioral control, but has no effect on the inhibitory behavioral control.[158] The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend avoidance of concomitant consumption of alcohol and caffeine, as taking them together may lead to increased alcohol consumption, with a higher risk of alcohol-associated injury.
Smoking

Smoking tobacco has been shown to increase caffeine clearance by 56% as a result of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons inducing the CYP1A2 enzyme.[159][10] The CYP1A2 enzyme that is induced by smoking is responsible for the metabolism of caffeine; increased enzyme activity leads to increased caffeine clearance, and is associated with greater coffee consumption for regular smokers.[160]
Birth control

Birth control pills can extend the half-life of caffeine by as much as 40%, requiring greater attention to caffeine consumption.[161][162]
Medications

Caffeine sometimes increases the effectiveness of some medications, such as those for headaches.[163] Caffeine was determined to increase the potency of some over-the-counter analgesic medications by 40%.[164]

The pharmacological effects of adenosine may be blunted in individuals taking large quantities of methylxanthines like caffeine.[165] Some other examples of methylxanthines include the medications theophylline and aminophylline, which are prescribed to relieve symptoms of asthma or COPD.[166]
Pharmacology
Pharmacodynamics
An illustrated chemical synapse
Postsynaptic
density
Voltage-
gated Ca++
channel
Synaptic
vesicle
Neurotransmitter
transporter
Receptor
Neurotransmitter
Axon terminal
Synaptic cleft
Dendrite
Structure of a typical chemical synapse
Two skeletal formulas: left – caffeine, right – adenosine.
Caffeine's primary mechanism of action is as an adenosine receptor antagonist in the brain.

In the absence of caffeine and when a person is awake and alert, little adenosine is present in CNS neurons. With a continued wakeful state, over time adenosine accumulates in the neuronal synapse, in turn binding to and activating adenosine receptors found on certain CNS neurons; when activated, these receptors produce a cellular response that ultimately increases drowsiness. When caffeine is consumed, it antagonizes adenosine receptors; in other words, caffeine prevents adenosine from activating the receptor by blocking the location on the receptor where adenosine binds to it. As a result, caffeine temporarily prevents or relieves drowsiness, and thus maintains or restores alertness.[5]
Receptor and ion channel targets

Caffeine is an antagonist of adenosine A2A receptors, and knockout mouse studies have specifically implicated antagonism of the A2A receptor as responsible for the wakefulness-promoting effects of caffeine.[167] Antagonism of A2A receptors in the ventrolateral preoptic area (VLPO) reduces inhibitory GABA neurotransmission to the tuberomammillary nucleus, a histaminergic projection nucleus that activation-dependently promotes arousal.[168] This disinhibition of the tuberomammillary nucleus is the downstream mechanism by which caffeine produces wakefulness-promoting effects.[168] Caffeine is an antagonist of all four adenosine receptor subtypes (A1, A2A, A2B, and A3), although with varying potencies.[5][167] The affinity (KD) values of caffeine for the human adenosine receptors are 12 μM at A1, 2.4 μM at A2A, 13 μM at A2B, and 80 μM at A3.[167]

Antagonism of adenosine receptors by caffeine also stimulates the medullary vagal, vasomotor, and respiratory centers, which increases respiratory rate, reduces heart rate, and constricts blood vessels.[5] Adenosine receptor antagonism also promotes neurotransmitter release (e.g., monoamines and acetylcholine), which endows caffeine with its stimulant effects;[5][169] adenosine acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter that suppresses activity in the central nervous system. Heart palpitations are caused by blockade of the A1 receptor.[5]

Because caffeine is both water- and lipid-soluble, it readily crosses the blood–brain barrier that separates the bloodstream from the interior of the brain. Once in the brain, the principal mode of action is as a nonselective antagonist of adenosine receptors (in other words, an agent that reduces the effects of adenosine). The caffeine molecule is structurally similar to adenosine, and is capable of binding to adenosine receptors on the surface of cells without activating them, thereby acting as a competitive antagonist.[170]

In addition to its activity at adenosine receptors, caffeine is an inositol trisphosphate receptor 1 antagonist and a voltage-independent activator of the ryanodine receptors (RYR1, RYR2, and RYR3).[171] It is also a competitive antagonist of the ionotropic glycine receptor.[172]
Effects on striatal dopamine

While caffeine does not directly bind to any dopamine receptors, it influences the binding activity of dopamine at its receptors in the striatum by binding to adenosine receptors that have formed GPCR heteromers with dopamine receptors, specifically the A1–D1 receptor heterodimer (this is a receptor complex with one adenosine A1 receptor and one dopamine D1 receptor) and the A2A–D2 receptor heterotetramer (this is a receptor complex with two adenosine A2A receptors and two dopamine D2 receptors).[173][174][175][176] The A2A–D2 receptor heterotetramer has been identified as a primary pharmacological target of caffeine, primarily because it mediates some of its psychostimulant effects and its pharmacodynamic interactions with dopaminergic psychostimulants.[174][175][176]

Caffeine also causes the release of dopamine in the dorsal striatum and nucleus accumbens core (a substructure within the ventral striatum), but not the nucleus accumbens shell, by antagonizing A1 receptors in the axon terminal of dopamine neurons and A1–A2A heterodimers (a receptor complex composed of one adenosine A1 receptor and one adenosine A2A receptor) in the axon terminal of glutamate neurons.[173][168] During chronic caffeine use, caffeine-induced dopamine release within the nucleus accumbens core is markedly reduced due to drug tolerance.[173][168]
Enzyme targets

Caffeine, like other xanthines, also acts as a phosphodiesterase inhibitor.[177] As a competitive nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor,[178] caffeine raises intracellular cyclic AMP, activates protein kinase A, inhibits TNF-alpha[179][180] and leukotriene[181] synthesis, and reduces inflammation and innate immunity.[181] Caffeine also affects the cholinergic system where it is a moderate inhibitor of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase.[182][183]
Pharmacokinetics
A diagram featuring 4 skeletal chemical formulas. Top (caffeine) relates to similar compounds paraxanthine, theobromine and theophylline.
Caffeine is metabolized in the liver via a single demethylation, resulting in three primary metabolites, paraxanthine (84%), theobromine (12%), and theophylline (4%), depending on which methyl group is removed.
Urinary metabolites of caffeine in humans at 48 hours post-dose[184]

Caffeine from coffee or other beverages is absorbed by the small intestine within 45 minutes of ingestion and distributed throughout all bodily tissues.[185] Peak blood concentration is reached within 1–2 hours.[186] It is eliminated by first-order kinetics.[187] Caffeine can also be absorbed rectally, evidenced by suppositories of ergotamine tartrate and caffeine (for the relief of migraine)[188] and of chlorobutanol and caffeine (for the treatment of hyperemesis).[189] However, rectal absorption is less efficient than oral: the maximum concentration (Cmax) and total amount absorbed (AUC) are both about 30% (i.e., 1/3.5) of the oral amounts.[190]

Caffeine's biological half-life – the time required for the body to eliminate one-half of a dose – varies widely among individuals according to factors such as pregnancy, other drugs, liver enzyme function level (needed for caffeine metabolism) and age. In healthy adults, caffeine's half-life is between 3 and 7 hours.[5] The half-life is decreased by 30-50% in adult male smokers, approximately doubled in women taking oral contraceptives, and prolonged in the last trimester of pregnancy.[127] In newborns the half-life can be 80 hours or more, dropping rapidly with age, possibly to less than the adult value by age 6 months.[127] The antidepressant fluvoxamine (Luvox) reduces the clearance of caffeine by more than 90%, and increases its elimination half-life more than tenfold, from 4.9 hours to 56 hours.[191]

Caffeine is metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome P450 oxidase enzyme system (particularly by the CYP1A2 isozyme) into three dimethylxanthines,[192] each of which has its own effects on the body:

    Paraxanthine (84%): Increases lipolysis, leading to elevated glycerol and free fatty acid levels in blood plasma.
    Theobromine (12%): Dilates blood vessels and increases urine volume. Theobromine is also the principal alkaloid in the cocoa bean (chocolate).
    Theophylline (4%): Relaxes smooth muscles of the bronchi, and is used to treat asthma. The therapeutic dose of theophylline, however, is many times greater than the levels attained from caffeine metabolism.[46]

1,3,7-Trimethyluric acid is a minor caffeine metabolite.[5] 7-Methylxanthine is also a metabolite of caffeine.[193][194] Each of the above metabolites is further metabolized and then excreted in the urine. Caffeine can accumulate in individuals with severe liver disease, increasing its half-life.[195]

A 2011 review found that increased caffeine intake was associated with a variation in two genes that increase the rate of caffeine catabolism. Subjects who had this mutation on both chromosomes consumed 40 mg more caffeine per day than others.[196] This is presumably due to the need for a higher intake to achieve a comparable desired effect, not that the gene led to a disposition for greater incentive of habituation.
Chemistry

Pure anhydrous caffeine is a bitter-tasting, white, odorless powder with a melting point of 235–238 °C.[7][8] Caffeine is moderately soluble in water at room temperature (2 g/100 mL), but quickly soluble in boiling water (66 g/100 mL).[197] It is also moderately soluble in ethanol (1.5 g/100 mL).[197] It is weakly basic (pKa of conjugate acid = ~0.6) requiring strong acid to protonate it.[198] Caffeine does not contain any stereogenic centers[199] and hence is classified as an achiral molecule.[200]

The xanthine core of caffeine contains two fused rings, a pyrimidinedione and imidazole. The pyrimidinedione in turn contains two amide functional groups that exist predominantly in a zwitterionic resonance the location from which the nitrogen atoms are double bonded to their adjacent amide carbons atoms. Hence all six of the atoms within the pyrimidinedione ring system are sp2 hybridized and planar. The imidazole ring also has a resonance. Therefore, the fused 5,6 ring core of caffeine contains a total of ten pi electrons and hence according to Hückel's rule is aromatic.[201]
Synthesis
One biosynthetic route of caffeine, as performed by Camellia and Coffea species[202][203]
One laboratory synthesis of caffeine[204][205]

The biosynthesis of caffeine is an example of convergent evolution among different species.[206][207][208]

Caffeine may be synthesized in the lab starting with 1,3-dimethylurea and malonic acid.[clarification needed][204][205][209] Production of synthesized caffeine largely takes place in pharmaceutical plants in China. Synthetic and natural caffeine are chemically identical and nearly indistinguishable. The primary distinction is that synthetic caffeine is manufactured from urea and chloroacetic acid, while natural caffeine is extracted from plant sources, a process known as decaffeination.[210]

Despite the different production methods, the final product and its effects on the body are identical. Research on synthetic caffeine supports that it has the same stimulating effects on the body as natural caffeine.[211] And although many claim that natural caffeine is absorbed slower and therefore leads to a gentler caffeine crash, there is little scientific evidence supporting the notion.[210]
Decaffeination
Main article: Decaffeination
Fibrous crystals of purified caffeine. Dark-field microscopy image, about 7 mm × 11 mm.

Germany, the birthplace of decaffeinated coffee, is home to several decaffeination plants, including the world's largest, Coffein Compagnie.[212] Over half of the decaf coffee sold in the U.S. first travels from the tropics to Germany for caffeine removal before making its way to American consumers.[citation needed]

Extraction of caffeine from coffee, to produce caffeine and decaffeinated coffee, can be performed using various solvents. Following are main methods:

    Water extraction: Coffee beans are soaked in water. The water, which contains many other compounds in addition to caffeine and contributes to the flavor of coffee, is then passed through activated charcoal, which removes the caffeine. The water can then be put back with the beans and evaporated dry, leaving decaffeinated coffee with its original flavor. Coffee manufacturers recover the caffeine and resell it for use in soft drinks and over-the-counter caffeine tablets.[213]
    Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction: Supercritical carbon dioxide is an excellent nonpolar solvent for caffeine, and is safer than the organic solvents that are otherwise used. The extraction process is simple: CO2 is forced through the green coffee beans at temperatures above 31.1 °C and pressures above 73 atm. Under these conditions, CO2 is in a "supercritical" state: It has gaslike properties that allow it to penetrate deep into the beans but also liquid-like properties that dissolve 97–99% of the caffeine. The caffeine-laden CO2 is then sprayed with high-pressure water to remove the caffeine. The caffeine can then be isolated by charcoal adsorption (as above) or by distillation, recrystallization, or reverse osmosis.[213]
    Extraction by organic solvents: Certain organic solvents such as ethyl acetate present much less health and environmental hazard than chlorinated and aromatic organic solvents used formerly. Another method is to use triglyceride oils obtained from spent coffee grounds.[213]

"Decaffeinated" coffees do in fact contain caffeine in many cases – some commercially available decaffeinated coffee products contain considerable levels. One study found that decaffeinated coffee contained 10 mg of caffeine per cup, compared to approximately 85 mg of caffeine per cup for regular coffee.[214]
Detection in body fluids

Caffeine can be quantified in blood, plasma, or serum to monitor therapy in neonates, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning, or facilitate a medicolegal death investigation. Plasma caffeine levels are usually in the range of 2–10 mg/L in coffee drinkers, 12–36 mg/L in neonates receiving treatment for apnea, and 40–400 mg/L in victims of acute overdosage. Urinary caffeine concentration is frequently measured in competitive sports programs, for which a level in excess of 15 mg/L is usually considered to represent abuse.[215]
Analogs

Some analog substances have been created which mimic caffeine's properties with either function or structure or both. Of the latter group are the xanthines DMPX[216] and 8-chlorotheophylline, which is an ingredient in dramamine. Members of a class of nitrogen substituted xanthines are often proposed as potential alternatives to caffeine.[217][unreliable source?] Many other xanthine analogues constituting the adenosine receptor antagonist class have also been elucidated.[218]

Some other caffeine analogs:

    Dipropylcyclopentylxanthine
    8-Cyclopentyl-1,3-dimethylxanthine
    8-Phenyltheophylline

Precipitation of tannins

Caffeine, as do other alkaloids such as cinchonine, quinine or strychnine, precipitates polyphenols and tannins. This property can be used in a quantitation method.[clarification needed][219]
Natural occurrence
Roasted coffee beans

Around thirty plant species are known to contain caffeine.[220] Common sources are the "beans" (seeds) of the two cultivated coffee plants, Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora (the quantity varies, but 1.3% is a typical value); and of the cocoa plant, Theobroma cacao; the leaves of the tea plant; and kola nuts. Other sources include the leaves of yaupon holly, South American holly yerba mate, and Amazonian holly guayusa; and seeds from Amazonian maple guarana berries. Temperate climates around the world have produced unrelated caffeine-containing plants.

Caffeine in plants acts as a natural pesticide: it can paralyze and kill predator insects feeding on the plant.[221] High caffeine levels are found in coffee seedlings when they are developing foliage and lack mechanical protection.[222] In addition, high caffeine levels are found in the surrounding soil of coffee seedlings, which inhibits seed germination of nearby coffee seedlings, thus giving seedlings with the highest caffeine levels fewer competitors for existing resources for survival.[223] Caffeine is stored in tea leaves in two places. Firstly, in the cell vacuoles where it is complexed with polyphenols. This caffeine probably is released into the mouth parts of insects, to discourage herbivory. Secondly, around the vascular bundles, where it probably inhibits pathogenic fungi from entering and colonizing the vascular bundles.[224] Caffeine in nectar may improve the reproductive success of the pollen producing plants by enhancing the reward memory of pollinators such as honey bees.[18]

The differing perceptions in the effects of ingesting beverages made from various plants containing caffeine could be explained by the fact that these beverages also contain varying mixtures of other methylxanthine alkaloids, including the cardiac stimulants theophylline and theobromine, and polyphenols that can form insoluble complexes with caffeine.[225]
Products
Caffeine content in select food and drugs[226][227][228][229][230]
Product 	Serving size 	Caffeine per serving (mg) 	Caffeine (mg/L)
Caffeine tablet (regular-strength) 	1 tablet 	100 	—
Caffeine tablet (extra-strength) 	1 tablet 	200 	—
Excedrin tablet 	1 tablet 	65 	—
Percolated coffee 	207 mL (7.0 US fl oz) 	80–135 	386–652
Drip coffee 	207 mL (7.0 US fl oz) 	115–175 	555–845
Coffee, decaffeinated 	207 mL (7.0 US fl oz) 	5–15 	24–72
Coffee, espresso 	44–60 mL (1.5–2.0 US fl oz) 	100 	1,691–2,254
Tea – black, green, and other types, – steeped for 3 min. 	177 mL (6.0 US fl oz) 	22–74[229][230] 	124–418
Guayakí yerba mate (loose leaf) 	6 g (0.21 oz) 	85[231] 	approx. 358
Coca-Cola 	355 mL (12.0 US fl oz) 	34 	96
Mountain Dew 	355 mL (12.0 US fl oz) 	54 	154
Pepsi Zero Sugar 	355 mL (12.0 US fl oz) 	69 	194
Guaraná Antarctica 	350 mL (12 US fl oz) 	30 	100
Jolt Cola 	695 mL (23.5 US fl oz) 	280 	403
Red Bull 	250 mL (8.5 US fl oz) 	80 	320
Coffee-flavored milk drink 	300–600 mL (10–20 US fl oz) 	33–197[232] 	66–354[232]
Cocoa, dry powder, unsweetened [unspecified strain] 	100 g 	230[233] 	—
Cocoa solids, defatted, Criollo strain 	100 g 	1130[234] 	—
Cocoa solids, defatted, Forastero strain 	100 g 	130[234] 	—
Cocoa solids, defatted, Nacional strain 	100 g 	240[234] 	—
Cocoa solids, defatted, Trinitario strain 	100 g 	630[234] 	—
Chocolate, dark, 70-85% cacao solids 	100 g 	80[235] 	—
Chocolate, dark, 60-69% cacao solids 	100 g 	86[236] 	—
Chocolate, dark, 45- 59% cacao solids 	100 g 	43[237] 	—
Candies, milk chocolate 	100 g 	20[238] 	—
Hershey's Special Dark (45% cacao content) 	1 bar (43 g or 1.5 oz) 	31 	—
Hershey's Milk Chocolate (11% cacao content) 	1 bar (43 g or 1.5 oz) 	10 	—

Products containing caffeine include coffee, tea, soft drinks ("colas"), energy drinks, other beverages, chocolate,[239] caffeine tablets, other oral products, and inhalation products. According to a 2020 study in the United States, coffee is the major source of caffeine intake in middle-aged adults, while soft drinks and tea are the major sources in adolescents.[79] Energy drinks are more commonly consumed as a source of caffeine in adolescents as compared to adults.[79]
Beverages
Main article: Caffeinated drink
Coffee

The world's primary source of caffeine is the coffee "bean" (the seed of the coffee plant), from which coffee is brewed. Caffeine content in coffee varies widely depending on the type of coffee bean and the method of preparation used;[240] even beans within a given bush can show variations in concentration. In general, one serving of coffee ranges from 80 to 100 milligrams, for a single shot (30 milliliters) of arabica-variety espresso, to approximately 100–125 milligrams for a cup (120 milliliters) of drip coffee.[241][242] Arabica coffee typically contains half the caffeine of the robusta variety.[240] In general, dark-roast coffee has slightly less caffeine than lighter roasts because the roasting process reduces caffeine content of the bean by a small amount.[241][242]
Tea

Tea contains more caffeine than coffee by dry weight. A typical serving, however, contains much less, since less of the product is used as compared to an equivalent serving of coffee. Also contributing to caffeine content are growing conditions, processing techniques, and other variables. Thus, teas contain varying amounts of caffeine.[243]

Tea contains small amounts of theobromine and slightly higher levels of theophylline than coffee. Preparation and many other factors have a significant impact on tea, and color is a poor indicator of caffeine content. Teas like the pale Japanese green tea, gyokuro, for example, contain far more caffeine than much darker teas like lapsang souchong, which has minimal caffeine content.[243]
Soft drinks and energy drinks

Caffeine is also a common ingredient of soft drinks, such as cola, originally prepared from kola nuts. Soft drinks typically contain 0 to 55 milligrams of caffeine per 12 ounce (350 mL) serving.[244] By contrast, energy drinks, such as Red Bull, can start at 80 milligrams of caffeine per serving. The caffeine in these drinks either originates from the ingredients used or is an additive derived from the product of decaffeination or from chemical synthesis. Guarana, a primary ingredient of energy drinks, contains large amounts of caffeine with small amounts of theobromine and theophylline in a naturally occurring slow-release excipient.[245]
Other beverages

    Maté is a drink popular in many parts of South America. Its preparation consists of filling a gourd with the leaves of the South American holly yerba mate, pouring hot but not boiling water over the leaves, and drinking with a straw, the bombilla, which acts as a filter so as to draw only the liquid and not the yerba leaves.[246]
    Guaraná is a soft drink originating in Brazil made from the seeds of the Guaraná fruit.
    The leaves of Ilex guayusa, the Ecuadorian holly tree, are placed in boiling water to make a guayusa tea.[247]
    The leaves of Ilex vomitoria, the yaupon holly tree, are placed in boiling water to make a yaupon tea.
    Commercially prepared coffee-flavoured milk beverages are popular in Australia.[248] Examples include Oak's Ice Coffee and Farmers Union Iced Coffee. The amount of caffeine in these beverages can vary widely. Caffeine concentrations can differ significantly from the manufacturer's claims.[232]

Cacao solids

Cocoa solids (derived from cocoa bean) contain 230 mg caffeine per 100 g.[233]

The caffeine content varies between cocoa bean strains. Caffeine content mg/g (sorted by lowest caffeine content):[234]

    Forastero (defatted): 1.3 mg/g
    Nacional (defatted): 2.4 mg/g
    Trinitario (defatted): 6.3/g
    Criollo (defatted): 11.3 mg/g

Chocolate

Caffeine per 100 g:

    Dark chocolate, 70-85% cacao solids: 80 mg[235]
    Dark chocolate, 60-69% cacao solids: 86 mg[236]
    Dark chocolate, 45- 59% cacao solids: 43 mg[237]
    Milk chocolate: 20 mg[238]

The stimulant effect of chocolate may be due to a combination of theobromine and theophylline, as well as caffeine.[249]
Tablets
No-Doz 100 mg caffeine tablets

Tablets offer several advantages over coffee, tea, and other caffeinated beverages, including convenience, known dosage, and avoidance of concomitant intake of sugar, acids, and fluids. The use of caffeine in this form is said to improve mental alertness.[250] These tablets are commonly used by students studying for their exams and by people who work or drive for long hours.[251]
Other oral products

One U.S. company is marketing oral dissolvable caffeine strips.[252] Another intake route is SpazzStick, a caffeinated lip balm.[253] Alert Energy Caffeine Gum was introduced in the United States in 2013, but was voluntarily withdrawn after an announcement of an investigation by the FDA of the health effects of added caffeine in foods.[254]
Inhalants

Similar to an e-cigarette, a caffeine inhaler may be used to deliver caffeine or a stimulant like guarana by vaping.[255] In 2012, the FDA sent a warning letter to one of the companies marketing an inhaler, expressing concerns for the lack of safety information available about inhaled caffeine.[256][257]
Combinations with other drugs

    Some beverages combine alcohol with caffeine to create a caffeinated alcoholic drink. The stimulant effects of caffeine may mask the depressant effects of alcohol, potentially reducing the user's awareness of their level of intoxication. Such beverages have been the subject of bans due to safety concerns. In particular, the United States Food and Drug Administration has classified caffeine added to malt liquor beverages as an "unsafe food additive".[258]
    Ya ba contains a combination of methamphetamine and caffeine.
    Painkillers such as propyphenazone/paracetamol/caffeine combine caffeine with an analgesic.

History
Discovery and spread of use
An old photo of a dozen old and middle-aged men sitting on the ground around a mat. A man in front sits next to a mortar and holds a bat, ready for grinding. A man opposite to him holds a long spoon.
Coffeehouse in Palestine, c. 1900
Main articles: History of chocolate, History of coffee, History of tea, and History of yerba mate

According to Chinese legend, the Chinese emperor Shennong, reputed to have reigned in about 3000 BCE, inadvertently discovered tea when he noted that when certain leaves fell into boiling water, a fragrant and restorative drink resulted.[259] Shennong is also mentioned in Lu Yu's Cha Jing, a famous early work on the subject of tea.[260]

The earliest credible evidence of either coffee drinking or knowledge of the coffee plant appears in the middle of the fifteenth century, in the Sufi monasteries of the Yemen in southern Arabia.[261] From Mokha, coffee spread to Egypt and North Africa, and by the 16th century, it had reached the rest of the Middle East, Persia and Turkey. From the Middle East, coffee drinking spread to Italy, then to the rest of Europe, and coffee plants were transported by the Dutch to the East Indies and to the Americas.[262]

Kola nut use appears to have ancient origins. It is chewed in many West African cultures, in both private and social settings, to restore vitality and ease hunger pangs.[263]

The earliest evidence of cocoa bean use comes from residue found in an ancient Mayan pot dated to 600 BCE. Also, chocolate was consumed in a bitter and spicy drink called xocolatl, often seasoned with vanilla, chile pepper, and achiote. Xocolatl was believed to fight fatigue, a belief probably attributable to the theobromine and caffeine content. Chocolate was an important luxury good throughout pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, and cocoa beans were often used as currency.[264]

Xocolatl was introduced to Europe by the Spaniards, and became a popular beverage by 1700. The Spaniards also introduced the cacao tree into the West Indies[265] and the Philippines.[266]

The leaves and stems of the yaupon holly (Ilex vomitoria) were used by Native Americans to brew a tea called asi or the "black drink".[267] Archaeologists have found evidence of this use far into antiquity,[268] possibly dating to Late Archaic times.[267]
Chemical identification, isolation, and synthesis
Friedlieb Ferdinand Runge, discoverer of caffeine

In 1819, the German chemist Friedlieb Ferdinand Runge isolated relatively pure[vague] caffeine for the first time; he called it "Kaffebase" (i.e., a base that exists in coffee).[269][270] In 1821, caffeine was isolated both by the French chemist Pierre Jean Robiquet and by another pair of French chemists, Pierre-Joseph Pelletier and Joseph Bienaimé Caventou, according to Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius in his yearly journal. Furthermore, Berzelius stated that the French chemists had made their discoveries independently of any knowledge of Runge's or each other's work.[271] However, Berzelius later acknowledged Runge's priority in the extraction of caffeine, stating:[272] "However, at this point, it should not remain unmentioned that Runge (in his Phytochemical Discoveries, 1820, pages 146–147) specified the same method and described caffeine under the name Caffeebase a year earlier than Robiquet, to whom the discovery of this substance is usually attributed, having made the first oral announcement about it at a meeting of the Pharmacy Society in Paris."

Pelletier's article on caffeine was the first to use the term in print (in the French form Caféine from the French word for coffee: café).[273] It corroborates Berzelius's account:

    Caffeine, noun (feminine). Crystallizable substance discovered in coffee in 1821 by Mr. Robiquet. During the same period – while they were searching for quinine in coffee because coffee is considered by several doctors to be a medicine that reduces fevers and because coffee belongs to the same family as the cinchona [quinine] tree – on their part, Messrs. Pelletier and Caventou obtained caffeine; but because their research had a different goal and because their research had not been finished, they left priority on this subject to Mr. Robiquet. We do not know why Mr. Robiquet has not published the analysis of coffee which he read to the Pharmacy Society. Its publication would have allowed us to make caffeine better known and give us accurate ideas of coffee's composition ...

Robiquet was one of the first to isolate and describe the properties of pure caffeine,[274] whereas Pelletier was the first to perform an elemental analysis.[275]

In 1827, M. Oudry isolated "théine" from tea,[276] but in 1838 it was proved by Mulder[277] and by Carl Jobst[278] that theine was actually the same as caffeine.

In 1895, German chemist Hermann Emil Fischer (1852–1919) first synthesized caffeine from its chemical components (i.e. a "total synthesis"), and two years later, he also derived the structural formula of the compound.[279] This was part of the work for which Fischer was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1902.[280]
Historic regulations

Because it was recognized that coffee contained some compound that acted as a stimulant, first coffee and later also caffeine has sometimes been subject to regulation. For example, in the 16th century Islamists in Mecca and in the Ottoman Empire made coffee illegal for some classes.[281][282][283] Charles II of England tried to ban it in 1676,[284][285] Frederick II of Prussia banned it in 1777,[286][287] and coffee was banned in Sweden at various times between 1756 and 1823.

In 1911, caffeine became the focus of one of the earliest documented health scares, when the US government seized 40 barrels and 20 kegs of Coca-Cola syrup in Chattanooga, Tennessee, alleging the caffeine in its drink was "injurious to health".[288] Although the Supreme Court later ruled in favor of Coca-Cola in United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola, two bills were introduced to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1912 to amend the Pure Food and Drug Act, adding caffeine to the list of "habit-forming" and "deleterious" substances, which must be listed on a product's label.[289]
Society and culture
Regulations
See also: Energy drink § Regulations
Globe icon.
	
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (October 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
United States

The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) considers safe beverages containing less than 0.02% caffeine;[290] but caffeine powder, which is sold as a dietary supplement, is unregulated.[291] It is a regulatory requirement that the label of most prepackaged foods must declare a list of ingredients, including food additives such as caffeine, in descending order of proportion. However, there is no regulatory provision for mandatory quantitative labeling of caffeine, (e.g., milligrams caffeine per stated serving size). There are a number of food ingredients that naturally contain caffeine. These ingredients must appear in food ingredient lists. However, as is the case for "food additive caffeine", there is no requirement to identify the quantitative amount of caffeine in composite foods containing ingredients that are natural sources of caffeine. While coffee or chocolate are broadly recognized as caffeine sources, some ingredients (e.g., guarana, yerba maté) are likely less recognized as caffeine sources. For these natural sources of caffeine, there is no regulatory provision requiring that a food label identify the presence of caffeine nor state the amount of caffeine present in the food.[292] The FDA guidance was updated in 2018.[293]
Consumption

Global consumption of caffeine has been estimated at 120,000 tonnes per year, making it the world's most popular psychoactive substance.[20] The consumption of caffeine has remained stable between 1997 and 2015.[294] Coffee, tea and soft drinks are the most common caffeine sources, with energy drinks contributing little to the total caffeine intake across all age groups.[294]
Religions

The Seventh-day Adventist Church asked for its members to "abstain from caffeinated drinks", but has removed this from baptismal vows (while still recommending abstention as policy).[295] Some from these religions believe that one is not supposed to consume a non-medical, psychoactive substance, or believe that one is not supposed to consume a substance that is addictive. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has said the following with regard to caffeinated beverages: "... the Church revelation spelling out health practices (Doctrine and Covenants 89) does not mention the use of caffeine. The Church's health guidelines prohibit alcoholic drinks, smoking or chewing of tobacco, and 'hot drinks' – taught by Church leaders to refer specifically to tea and coffee."[296]

Gaudiya Vaishnavas generally also abstain from caffeine, because they believe it clouds the mind and overstimulates the senses.[297] To be initiated under a guru, one must have had no caffeine, alcohol, nicotine or other drugs, for at least a year.[298]

Caffeinated beverages are widely consumed by Muslims. In the 16th century, some Muslim authorities made unsuccessful attempts to ban them as forbidden "intoxicating beverages" under Islamic dietary laws.[299][300]
Other organisms
Caffeine effects on spider webs
Caffeine effects on spider webs
See also: Effect of psychoactive drugs on animals

The bacteria Pseudomonas putida CBB5 can live on pure caffeine and can cleave caffeine into carbon dioxide and ammonia.[301]

Caffeine is toxic to birds[302] and to dogs and cats,[303] and has a pronounced adverse effect on mollusks, various insects, and spiders.[304] This is at least partly due to a poor ability to metabolize the compound, causing higher levels for a given dose per unit weight.[184] Caffeine has also been found to enhance the reward memory of honey bees.[18]
Research

Caffeine has been used to double chromosomes in haploid wheat.[305] 

Espresso (/ɛˈsprɛsoʊ/ ⓘ, Italian: [eˈsprɛsso]) is a concentrated form of coffee produced by forcing hot water under high pressure through finely ground coffee beans. Originating in Italy, espresso has become one of the most popular coffee-brewing methods worldwide. It is characterized by its small serving size, typically 25–30 ml, and its distinctive layers: a dark body topped with a lighter-colored foam called "crema".

Espresso machines use pressure to extract a highly concentrated coffee with a complex flavor profile in a short time, usually 25–30 seconds. The result is a beverage with a higher concentration of suspended and dissolved solids than regular drip coffee, giving espresso its characteristic body and intensity.[3][4] Despite the stronger taste profile, espresso typically contains fewer milligrams of caffeine than a standard serving of drip-brewed coffee.[5]

Espresso serves as the base for other coffee drinks, including cappuccino, caffè latte, and americano. It can be made with various types of coffee beans and roast levels, allowing for a wide range of flavors and strengths. The quality of an espresso is influenced by factors such as the grind size, water temperature, pressure, and the barista's skill in tamping the coffee grounds.

While espresso contains more caffeine per unit volume than most coffee beverages, its typical serving size results in less caffeine per serving compared to larger drinks such as drip coffee. The cultural significance of espresso extends beyond its consumption, playing a central role in coffee shop culture and the third-wave coffee movement, which emphasizes artisanal production and high-quality beans.
Etymology and spelling

Some English dictionaries translate espresso as 'pressed-out',[6] but the word also conveys the senses of expressly for you and quickly:

    The words express, expres and espresso each have several meanings in English, French and Italian. The first meaning is to do with the idea of "expressing" ("pressing out of") or squeezing the flavour from the coffee using the pressure of the steam. The second meaning is to do with speed, as in a train. Finally there is the notion of doing something "expressly" for a person ... The first Bezzera and Pavoni espresso machines in 1906 took 45 seconds to make a cup of coffee, one at a time, expressly for you.[7] 

Modern espresso, using hot water under pressure, as pioneered by Gaggia in the 1940s, was originally called crema caffè (lit. 'cream coffee'), as seen on old Gaggia machines, due to the crema.[8]

The spelling expresso is mostly considered incorrect, although some sources call it a less common variant.[9] It is common in French and Portuguese. Italy uses the term espresso, substituting s for most x letters in Latin-root words, with the term deriving from the past participle of the Italian verb esprimere, itself derived from the Latin exprimere, which means 'to express', and refers to the process by which hot water is forced under pressure through ground coffee;[10][11] x is not considered part of the standard Italian alphabet. Italians commonly refer to espresso simply as caffè (lit. 'coffee'), espresso being the ordinary coffee to order. The same happens in Portugal (café), with some regional variations (bica in Lisbon and cimbalino traditionally in Porto). In Spain, while café expreso is seen as the more formal denomination, café solo (alone, without milk) is the usual way to ask for it at an espresso bar. Some sources state that expresso is an incorrect spelling, including Garner's Modern American Usage.[12] While the 'expresso' spelling is recognized as mainstream usage in some American dictionaries,[13][14] some cooking websites call the 'x' variant illegitimate.[15][16][17] Oxford Dictionaries online states: "The spelling expresso is not used in the original Italian and is strictly incorrect, although it is common."[18] The Oxford English Dictionary and Merriam-Webster call it a variant spelling.[12] The Online Etymology Dictionary calls expresso a variant of espresso.[19] The Oxford Dictionary of American Usage and Style (2000) describes the spelling expresso as "wrong", and specifies espresso as the only correct form.[20] The third edition of Fowler's Modern English Usage, published by the Oxford University Press in 1996, noted that the form espresso "has entirely driven out the variant expresso (which was presumably invented under the impression that it meant 'fast, express')".[21]
History
Precursors
Angelo Moriondo, inventor of an important precursor of the espresso machine
First patent (vol. 33 n. 256, 1884) for the espresso machine, by Angelo Moriondo

Angelo Moriondo, from Turin, patented a steam-driven "instantaneous" coffee beverage making device in 1884 (No. 33/256). The device is "almost certainly the first Italian bar machine that controlled the supply of steam and water separately through the coffee" and Moriondo is "certainly one of the earliest discoverers of the expresso [sic] machine, if not the earliest". He was granted patent no. 33/256 dated 16 May 1884 (according to the "Bollettino delle privative industriali del Regno d'Italia", 2nd Series, Volume 15, Year 1884, pp. 635 – 655).[22][23] Unlike true espresso machines, it brewed in bulk, not as individual servings.
Luigi Bezzera and one of the first espresso machines at the World Expo 1906 in Milan, Italy
Bezzera Eagle 2 Coffee Maker, presented at Central Cafe Budapest

Seventeen years later, in 1901, Luigi Bezzera, from Milan, devised and patented several improvements to the espresso machine, the first of which was applied for on 19 December 1901. Titled "Innovations in the machinery to prepare and immediately serve coffee beverage"; Patent No. 153/94, 61707, was granted on 5 June 1902. In 1903, the patent was bought by Desiderio Pavoni, who founded the La Pavoni company and began to produce the machine industrially, manufacturing one machine daily in a small workshop in Via Parini, Milan.[24]
Spread
	
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

A detailed discussion of the spread of espresso is given in (Morris 2007). In Italy, the rise of espresso consumption was associated with industrialization and urbanization, notably in Turin, Genoa, and Milan, in northwest Italy.[citation needed] Italians also spread espresso culture into their East African colonies, Italian Somalia and Italian Eritrea.[25]

The third-wave coffee movement encompasses espresso machines as a broader coffee culture that values relationships with growers and importers and the craftsmanship involved in making specific coffee-based drinks. The mention of brands such as Synesso, La Marzocco, and Slayer, known for their top-notch equipment, highlights the differences between traditional espresso machines and super-automatic machines to achieve a complete coffee preparation.[26]
Characteristics

Espresso is generally thicker than coffee brewed by other methods, with a viscosity similar to that of warm honey. This is due to the higher concentration of suspended and dissolved solids and the crema on top (a foam with a creamy consistency).[27] As a result of the pressurized brewing process, the flavors and chemicals in a typical cup of espresso are very concentrated.

Espresso contains more caffeine per unit volume than most coffee beverages, but as its usual serving size of 25–30 ml (1 US oz) is much smaller than other coffee drinks, the overall caffeine content of a single "serving" of espresso is generally lower than that of other coffees.[28] While the exact caffeine content of any coffee drink will vary, a typical 30 millilitres (1 US fluid ounce) serving of espresso contains approximately 65 milligrams of caffeine, but a typical 240 millilitres (8 US fluid ounces) serving of drip coffee contains 150–200 mg of caffeine.[29][30][31]

The three dispersed phases in espresso are what make the beverage unique. The first dispersed phase is an emulsion of oil droplets. The second phase is suspended solids, while the third is the layer of gas bubbles or foam. The dispersion of very small oil droplets is perceived in the mouth as creamy. This characteristic of espresso contributes to what is known as the body of the beverage. These oil droplets preserve some of the aromatic compounds that are lost to the air in other coffee forms, enhancing the strong flavor of espresso.[32]

The crema is a layer of dense foam that forms on top of the drink.[33][34] It consists of emulsified oils in the ground coffee turned into a colloid, which does not occur in other brewing methods. Crema is produced when water placed under very high pressure dissolves more carbon dioxide, a gas present inside the coffee that is produced during the roasting process.[35]: 96 

Espresso is served on its own, and is also used as the base for various other coffee drinks, including caffè latte, cappuccino, caffè macchiato, caffè mocha, flat white, and americano.
Process
Espresso brewing
Finely ground coffee for espresso

Espresso is made by forcing very hot water under high pressure through finely ground compacted coffee. There is no universal standard defining the process of extracting espresso,[36] but several published definitions attempt to constrain the amount and type of ground coffee used, the temperature and pressure of the water, and the rate of extraction.[37][38] Generally, one uses an espresso machine to make espresso.

The act of producing a shot of espresso is often called "pulling" a shot, originating from lever espresso machines, with which a barista pulls down a handle attached to a spring-loaded piston, which forces hot water through the coffee at high pressure. However, it is more common for an electric pump to generate the pressure.[39]

Tamping down the coffee promotes the water's even penetration through the grounds.[40] This process produces a thicker beverage by extracting both solid and dissolved components.

The technical parameters outlined by the Italian Espresso National Institute for making a "certified Italian espresso" are:[41]
Parameter 	Value
Necessary portion of ground coffee 	7 g ± 0,5
Exit temperature of water from unit 	88 °C ± 2 °C
Temperature in cup 	67 °C ± 3 °C
Entry water pressure 	9 bar ± 1
Percolation time 	25 ± 5 seconds
Viscosity at 45 °C 	> 1,5 mPa s
Total fat 	> 2 mg/ml
Caffeine 	< 100 mg/cup
Volume in cup (including crema) 	25 ml ± 2,5
Roasts

Any bean or roasting level can be used to produce authentic espresso. For example, in southern Italy, a darker roast is generally preferred. Farther north, the trend moves toward slightly lighter roasts, while outside Italy a wide range is popular.[42]
Variables
See also: Doppio, Ristretto, and Lungo
	
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Extracting a doppio
A double ristretto with the first half of the shot in the glass at the bottom of the image, and the second half in the glass on the right

The main variables in a shot of espresso are the "size" and "length".[43][44] This terminology is standardized, but the precise sizes and proportions vary substantially.

Cafés may have a standardized shot (size and length), such as "triple ristretto",[44] only varying the number of shots in espresso-based drinks such as lattes, but not changing the extraction. Changing between a double and a triple requires changing the filter basket size, while changing between ristretto, normale, and lungo may require changing the grind.

The size can be a single, double, or triple, using a proportional amount of ground coffee, roughly 7, 14, and 21 grams; correspondingly sized filter baskets are used. The Italian multiplier term doppio is often used for a double, with solo and triplo being more rarely used for singles and triples. The single shot is the traditional shot size, being the maximum that could easily be pulled on a lever machine. Single baskets are sharply tapered or stepped down in diameter to provide comparable depth to the double baskets and, therefore, comparable resistance to water pressure. Most double baskets are gently tapered (the "Faema model"), while others, such as the La Marzocco, have straight sides. Triple baskets are normally straight-sided. Portafilters will often come with two spouts, usually closely spaced, and a double-size basket. Each spout can optionally dispense into a separate cup, yielding two solo-size (but doppio-brewed) shots, or into a single cup (hence the close spacing). True solo shots are rare, with a single shot in a café generally being half of a doppio shot. In espresso-based drinks in America, particularly larger milk-based drinks, a drink with three or four shots of espresso will be called "triple" or "quad", respectively.[citation needed]

The length of the shot can be ristretto (or stretto) (reduced), normale or standard (normal), or lungo (long):[45] these may correspond to a smaller or larger drink with the same amount of ground coffee and same level of extraction or to different length of extraction. Proportions vary, and the volume (and low density) of crema makes volume-based comparisons difficult (precise measurement uses the mass of the drink). Typically, ristretto is half the volume of normale, and lungo is double to triple the normale volume. For a double shot (14 grams of dry coffee), a normale uses about 60 ml of water. A double ristretto, a common form associated with espresso, uses half the amount of water, about 30 ml. Ristretto, normale, and lungo may not simply be the same shot stopped at different times (which could result in an under- or over-extracted shot), but have the grind adjusted (finer for ristretto, coarser for lungo) to achieve the target volume.[35]: 103  A significantly longer shot is the caffè crema, which is longer than a lungo, ranging in size from 120–240 ml (4.2–8.4 imp fl oz; 4.1–8.1 US fl oz), and brewed in the same way, with a coarser grind. Passing too much water through the ground coffee can add other, potentially unpleasant flavors to the espresso.[35]: 99 
Machines
Main article: Espresso machine
	
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
A manual Italian handmade espresso machine
An automatic Italian handmade espresso machine

Home espresso machines have increased in popularity with the general rise of interest in espresso. Today, a wide range of home espresso equipment can be found in kitchen and appliance stores, online vendors, and department stores. The first espresso machine for home use was the Gaggia Gilda.[46] Soon afterwards, similar machines such as the Faema Faemina, FE-AR La Peppina, and VAM Caravel followed suit, with similar form factors and operational principles.[47] These machines still have a small but dedicated share of fans. Until the advent of the first small electrical pump-based espresso machines, such as the Gaggia Baby and Quickmill 810, home espresso machines were not widely adopted. In recent years, the increased availability of convenient countertop fully automatic home espresso makers and pod-based espresso serving systems has increased the quantity of espresso consumed at home. The popularity of home espresso making parallels the increase of home coffee roasting. Some amateurs pursue both home roasting coffee and making espresso.[citation needed]
Espresso-based drinks
Main article: List of coffee drinks § Espresso

In addition to being served alone, espresso is frequently blended, notably with milk, either steamed (without significant foam), wet foamed (microfoam) and dry foamed, or with hot water.[48]
Type 	Drink volume 	Notes
Espresso 	25–30 ml (0.85–1.01 US fl oz) 	The basic drink from which other milk and non-milk coffee drinks are based.
Ristretto 	20 ml (0.68 US fl oz) 	Condensed espresso to approximately 20 ml.
Macchiato 	30–40 ml (1.0–1.4 US fl oz) 	Macchiato means 'spot' or 'stain' in Italian. According to the classic Italian method, a spoonful of milk foam is added to the espresso, according to the modern method, it is filled to the edge of the cup with microfoam.
Lungo 	60 ml (2.0 US fl oz) 	Espresso pulled with double the amount of water.
Americano 	150–180 ml (5.1–6.1 US fl oz) 	Espresso topped up with hot water in a ratio of 1:5.
Long black 	150–180 ml (5.1–6.1 US fl oz) 	Similar to an americano, but on the contrary, the espresso is poured into the hot water.[49]
Cappuccino 	150–180 ml (5.1–6.1 US fl oz) 	It is prepared as an espresso with a large amount of milk and milk foam. Latte art technique is often painted into the drink.
Caffè latte 	250–280 ml (8.5–9.5 US fl oz) 	At least 210 g of lightly whipped milk with foam at a temperature of 58–70 °C is poured into the espresso.
Latte macchiato 	250 ml (8.5 US fl oz) 	Milk and milk foam are poured into a tall glass, which is left to stand for at least half a minute, then one shot of espresso is poured into it, creating three colored layers.

    Ristretto
    Ristretto
    Macchiato
    Macchiato
    Lungo
    Lungo
    Americano
    Americano
    Long black
    Long black
    Cappuccino
    Cappuccino
    Preparation of caffè latte
    Preparation of caffè latte
    Latte macchiato
    Latte macchiato

Other variants:

    Caffè crema: "long" espresso from more water and coarser ground coffee, approximately 120–180 ml
    Espresso con panna: espresso with cream
    Viennese coffee: 2 shots of espresso with whipped cream
    Caffè mocha: caffè latte with chocolate
    Espresso martini: espresso with coffee liqueur and vodka
    Caffè corretto ('corrected coffee'): espresso with brandy, grappa, or sambuca
    Freddo espresso: espresso is mixed with the sugar and ice in a drink mixer
    Espresso and tonic

See also

    flagItaly portalDrink portaliconCoffee portal

    List of coffee drinks
    Caffeinated drink – type of drink
    Caffè macchiato
    Doppio
    Lungo
    Ristretto

    Latte[a] (/ˈlɑːteɪ, ˈlæteɪ/)[1][2] or caffè latte (Italian: [kafˌfɛ lˈlatte]),[3][4] also known as caffè e latte, caffellatte or caffelatte, is a coffee drink of Italian origin made with espresso and steamed milk, traditionally served in a glass. Variants include the chocolate-flavored caffè mocha or replacing the coffee with another beverage base such as masala chai (spiced Indian tea), mate, matcha,[5] turmeric or rooibos; alternatives to milk, such as soy milk, coconut milk, almond milk or oat milk, are also used.

The term latte comes from caffellatte[6] or caffè latte (from caffè e latte, lit. 'coffee and milk'); in English orthography, either or both words sometimes have an accent on the final e (a hyperforeignism in the case of *latté). In Northern Europe and Scandinavia, the term café au lait has traditionally been used for the combination of espresso and milk. In France, cafè latte is from the original name of the beverage (caffè latte); a combination of espresso and steamed milk equivalent to a "latte" is in French called un crème (un grand crème using cream instead of milk) and in German Milchkaffee.
Definition and etymology
Definition
Preparation of caffè latte

A caffè latte consists of one or more shots of espresso, served in a glass (or sometimes a cup), into which hot steamed milk is added.[7] The difference between a caffè latte and a cappuccino is that the cappuccino is served in a small 140 mL (5 US fl oz) cup with a layer of thick foam on top of the milk, and a caffè latte is served in a larger 230 mL (8 US fl oz) glass (or cup), without the layer of thick foam.[8] Thus, a caffè latte is much milkier than a cappuccino, resulting in a milder coffee taste. The way the milk is steamed for a caffè latte results in very fine bubbles being incorporated in the hot milk. This microfoam can be poured in such a way as to form patterns in the white microfoam and brown crema (latte art). The texture of the microfoam changes the taste and feel of the drink.[9]
Latte art
Latte art

A similar drink is the latte macchiato, which is also served in a glass, but the espresso is added to the glass after the steamed milk.[7] In Italy, milky coffee drinks such as caffè latte, latte macchiato, and cappuccino are almost always prepared for breakfast only.[10]

In the United States, a latte is often heavily sweetened with 3% sugar (or even more). These sweeteners usually come in the form of refined white sugars, artificial sweeteners or agave syrup.[11]
Etymology
	
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2024) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

In English-speaking countries, latte is shorthand for caffellatte or caffè latte (from caffè e latte, lit. 'coffee and milk'), which is similar to the French café au lait, the Spanish café con leche, the Catalan cafè amb llet, or the Portuguese galão.[citation needed]

According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the term caffè e latte was first used in English in 1867 by William Dean Howells in his essay "Italian Journeys",[12] but as this preceded the spread of espresso machines, this drink would have been "nothing like the lattes found today at specialty coffee shops".
History
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2024)
Caffè latte
Origin

The drink is thought to have "technically originated" in 17th-century Europe.[13]

The modern caffè latte appeared in the 20th century, following the invention of the espresso machine in the 19th century.[14]
Outside Europe

In the United States, latte was popularized in Seattle, Washington, in the early 1980s.[15]

In South Korea, espresso and its variants (cappuccino, latte, and caffè mocha) became popular in 2000.[16]
Politics

Calling people "latte drinkers" pejoratively has become a common political attack in some Western cultures. The popularity of espresso drinking in large cities, especially among more affluent urban populations, has caused some to consider it elitist behavior. In the United States, conservative political commentators have been known to call their opponents "latte-drinking liberal elites"[17][18][19][20] or "latte liberals".[21][22] In Canadian politics, latte drinking is used to portray people as out-of-touch intellectuals and the antithesis of the Tim Hortons coffee drinker, who is considered representative of an ordinary Canadian.[23][24]

According to a 2018 study, 16% of liberals in the United States prefer lattes, whereas 9% of conservatives and 11% of moderates do.[25] The study states further that the overwhelming majority of people, whether they are liberal, conservative or moderate, express a preference for brewed coffee.[25] 

Coffee drinks are made by brewing water with ground coffee beans. The brewing is either done slowly, by drip, filter, French press, moka pot or percolator, or done very quickly, under pressure, by an espresso machine. When put under the pressure of an espresso machine, the coffee is termed espresso, while slow-brewed coffees are generally termed brewed coffee. While all coffee drinks are based on either coffee or espresso, some drinks add milk or cream, some are made with steamed milk or non-dairy milks, or add water (like the americano). Upon milk additions, coffee's flavor can vary with different syrups or sweeteners, alcoholic liqueurs, and even combinations of coffee with espresso or tea.[1] There are many variations to the basic coffee or espresso bases.

With the invention of the Gaggia machine, espresso and espresso with milk, such as cappuccino and latte, spread in popularity from Italy to the UK in the 1950s. It then came to America, and with the rise in popularity of the Italian coffee culture in the 1980s, it began to spread worldwide via coffeehouses and coffeehouse chains.[2][3]

The caffeine content in coffee beans may be reduced via one of several decaffeination processes to produce decaffeinated coffee, also known as decaf, which may be served as regular, espresso or instant coffee.
Infused
Drip or filtered

Drip-brewed, or filtered coffee, is brewed by hot water passing slowly over roasted, ground coffee beans contained in a filter. Water seeps through the ground coffee, absorbing its oils, flavours and essences as it passes through the filter. The used coffee grounds remain in the filter as the liquid slowly drips into a collecting vessel, such as a carafe or pot.

Paper coffee filters were invented in Germany by Melitta Bentz in 1908.[4] To reduce waste, some coffee drinkers use fine wire mesh filters, which can be re-used for years. Many countries in Latin America and Africa, traditionally, prepare drip coffee using a small reusable bag made of cotton or other cloth.
French press or cafetière
A French press set and coffee

A French press, also known as a press pot, coffee press, coffee plunger, cafetière (UK) or cafetière à piston, is a coffee brewing device patented by Italian designer Attilio Calimani in 1929.[5] A French press requires a coarser grind of coffee than a drip brew coffee filter, as finer grounds will seep through the press filter and into the coffee.[6]

Coffee in a French press is brewed by placing the ground coffee in the empty beaker and adding hot (93–96 °C, 200–205 °F) water, in proportions of about 28 grams (1 ounce) of coffee to 450 millilitres (15 US fluid ounces; 16 imperial fluid ounces) of water, more or less to taste. After approximately four minutes the plunger is pressed to separate the grounds and hold them at the bottom of the beaker, then the coffee is poured.[7] Coffee press users have different preferences for how long to wait before pressing the plunger, with some enthusiasts preferring to wait longer than four minutes.
Cold brew
This section is an excerpt from Cold brew coffee.[edit]

Cold brew coffee, also called cold water extraction or cold pressing, is a type of coffee prepared by the process of steeping coffee grounds in water at cool temperatures for an extended period. Coarse-ground beans are soaked in water for about 12 to 24 hours.[8][9]
5 flavours of High Brew-branded cans in a tub of ice
A display of cold brew coffees in a supermarket
Flash brew

Flash brewing is another Japanese style of cold coffee brewing. It is similar to drip coffee, as it involves pouring hot water over ground coffee contained in a filter. In this method, a smaller amount of hot water is used and the coffee is dripped directly over ice which immediately cools the coffee down. Unlike cold brewing – another cold coffee method – flash brewed coffee preserves the flavor and acidity that is characteristic of hot drip coffee. Because of this, flash brew coffee is well suited for lighter roasts of coffee, chosen for their unique and complex flavors.[10] In many coffeeshops and coffee chains, iced coffee is made by taking hot coffee and adding ice, which waters down the coffee over time. Flash brewing works around this issue.
Boiled
Percolated

A coffee percolator is a type of pot used to brew coffee by continually cycling the boiling water through the grounds using gravity until the required coffee strength is reached. There are stove-top percolators and standalone units which contain a built-in heating element. Percolators were popular until the 1970s, when they were widely replaced with other techniques. By the mid-1970s, many companies ceased production of percolators.[citation needed]
Turkish
Traditional serving with a glass of water and lokum

Beans for Turkish coffee are ground to a fine powder. Turkish coffee is prepared by immersing the coffee grounds in water and heating until it just boils. This method produces the maximum amount of foam. If the coffee is left to boil longer, less foam remains. In Turkey, four degrees of sweetness are used. The Turkish terms and approximate amounts are as follows: sade (plain; no sugar), az şekerli (little sugar; half a level teaspoon of sugar), orta şekerli (medium sugar; one level teaspoon), şekerli or çok şekerli (high sugar; two or three teaspoons). Before boiling, the coffee and the desired amount of sugar are stirred until all the coffee sinks and the sugar is dissolved. If the coffee is stirred for longer (up to the boiling point), little or no foam remains. The Turkish term for this kind of coffee is köpüksüz (no foam).

Turkish coffee is an Intangible Cultural Heritage of Turkey confirmed by UNESCO.[11]
Moka
Not to be confused with Caffè mocha.

Moka coffee is coffee brewed with a moka pot, a stovetop coffee maker which produces coffee by passing hot water pressurized by steam through ground coffee at a lower pressure than an espresso maker. The moka pot is an Italian invention, first produced by Bialetti in the early 1930s. The flavor of moka coffee depends greatly on bean variety, roast level, fineness of grind, and the level of heat used. Due to the higher-than-atmospheric pressure involved, the mixture of water and steam reaches temperatures well above 100 °C (212 °F), causing a more efficient extraction of caffeine and flavors from the grounds, and resulting in a stronger brew than that obtained by drip brewing.[citation needed]
Kopi kothok

Kopi kothok [id] is made by boiling coffee grounds and sugar together in a pot or a saucepan. It is very common in Cepu and Bojonegoro.[12] The ratio of coffee grounds and sugar is generally one to two. A 1:1 ratio for more bitter coffee drinks.[13] Milk also can be added according to the order before boiling the coffee grounds.
Yazdi Coffee

Yazdi coffee, also known as Rozeh Coffee, is a traditional drink served to mourners in Yazd during Muharram, dating back to at least the Qajar era. It belongs to the Middle Eastern coffee family and was nationally registered as an intangible cultural heritage of Iran in July 2019.[14] Serving coffee at mourning ceremonies was influenced by Zoroastrian traditions and became an Islamic ritual in Yazd. The earliest written record dates to 1832.[15]

Brewing Yazdi Coffee involves roasting coffee, boiling it for hours, and adding rosewater, cardamom, and sugar. It is strained through silk cloth and served in small cups, sometimes with Yazdi cake. Yazdi coffee was registered as Iran’s intangible cultural heritage on July 4, 2019, under registration number 1893.[16]
Vacuum coffee

A vacuum coffee maker brews coffee using two chambers where vapor pressure and vacuum produce coffee. This type of coffee maker is also known as vac pot, siphon or syphon coffee maker, and was invented by Loeff of Berlin in the 1830s. These devices have since been used for more than a century in many parts of the world and more recently have been given a new use by bartenders and chefs to make hot cocktails and broths.[17]
Espresso
Espresso
Caffè lungo
Caffè americano
Cappuccino

Espresso is brewed by machine, forcing a small amount of nearly boiling water and steam – about 86 to 95 °C (187 to 203 °F) – under pressure through finely ground and compacted coffee.[18][19] The espresso machine was patented in 1901 from an earlier 1884 machine,[20][21] and developed in Italy; with the invention of the Gaggia machine, espresso spread in popularity to the UK in the 1950s where it was more often drunk with milk as cappuccino due to the influence of the British milk bars,[22][23][3] then America in the 1980s where again it was mainly drunk with milk,[3] and then via coffeehouse chains it spread worldwide.[3] Espresso is generally denser than coffee brewed by other methods, having a higher concentration of suspended and dissolved solids; it generally has a creamy foam on top known as crema.[24] Espresso is the base for a number of other coffee drinks, such as latte, cappuccino, macchiato, mocha, and americano.[25] The term espresso, substituting s for most x letters in Latin-root words, with the term deriving from the past participle of the Italian verb esprimere, itself derived from the Latin exprimere, means 'to express', and refers to the process by which hot water is forced under pressure through ground coffee.[26][27]

Doppio
    Doppio is a double shot, served in a demitasse cup.[28] 
Caffè lungo
    A lungo (or allongé in French) is similar to a caffè americano or a long black. However, instead of adding water to an espresso, all the water is brewed. The lungo is generally smaller than an americano or a long black. 
Caffè americano
    An americano is prepared by adding hot water to espresso, giving a similar strength to but different flavor from brewed coffee. The drink consists of a single or double-shot of espresso combined with between 150 and 400 ml (5 and 14 US fluid ounces; 5 and 14 imperial fluid ounces) of hot water. The strength of an americano varies with the number of shots of espresso added. In the United States, americano is used broadly to mean combining hot water and espresso in either order. Variations include long black and lungo. 
Cappuccino
    Main article: Cappuccino
Latte
    Main article: Caffé latte
Manilo
    A manilo consists of a regular espresso shot and less than 100 ml (3.4 US fluid ounces; 3.5 imperial fluid ounces) of silky milk. Popularised due to its strength and taste, without a lot of milk. Similar to a half flat white, but slightly smaller.[citation needed] 
Cortado
    Main article: Cortado

    Cortado is a Spanish beverage made by pouring a small amount of espresso in a small glass cup, then cutting it with an equal amount of steamed milk in order to neutralize the bitterness. The name comes from the Spanish word cortar, meaning to cut, which refers to the preparation process.

    The ratio of espresso to milk gives a unique flavor where the robustness of the coffee comes through, while the finish is velvety due to steamed milk. Cortado is typically consumed in coffee bars as it is not intended to be taken on the go.
Flat white
    Main article: Flat white

    A flat white is an espresso with microfoam (steamed milk with small, fine bubbles and a glossy or velvety consistency). It is comparable to a latte, but smaller in volume and with less microfoam, therefore having a higher proportion of coffee to milk, and milk that is more velvety in consistency – allowing the espresso to dominate the flavour, while being supported by the milk.
Café cubano
    Main article: Cuban espresso

    Cuban tradition is to drink coffee strong and sweet, often mixing the sugar with the coffee beans before brewing. The traditional method of brewing coffee was a filter method using a cloth cone; this has mostly been replaced with an aluminium cafetera or coffeemaker—in tourist areas some cafés will have an espresso machine, though espresso machines are expensive, so espresso is not a common drink for most Cubans.[29][30] Though quality coffee is grown in Cuba, it is expensive, so most Cubans drink coffee imported from Puerto Rico, and often mixed with ground peas.[31][32] The Cuban habit of brewing coffee with sugar has spread to Miami, West Palm Beach, Tampa and the Keys, in Florida, where espresso is the preferred brewing method and an espresso brewed with sugar is termed café cubano, Cuban coffee, Cuban espresso, cafecito, Cuban pull, or Cuban shot.[33] Sometimes demerara sugar is used, and sometimes the sugar (white or brown) is not brewed with the coffee, but is placed in the cup as the coffee is dripped into it, then stirred into a froth.[34][35] Variations on the Miami café cubano are with a splash of milk – cortadito; and with steamed milk – café con leche.[36]
Caffè crema
    Main article: Caffè crema

    Caffè crema (Italian for 'cream coffee') refers to two different coffee drinks:[37] an old name for espresso (the 1940s and 1950s), and a long espresso drink primarily served in Germany, Switzerland and Austria and northern Italy (the 1980s onwards), along the Italian/ Swiss and Italian/ Austrian border.[38] As a term, it generally means "espresso", while in technical discussions, referring to the long drink, it may more narrowly be referred to as Swiss caffè crema. Variant terms include "crema caffè" and the hyperforeignism "café crema" – "café" is French, while "caffè" and "crema" are Italian, thus "café crema" mixes French and Italian.
Cafe Zorro
    A cafe Zorro is a double espresso or doppio, added to hot water with a 1:1 ratio.[39] 
Espresso Roberto
    An espresso Roberto is a double shot espresso with a small amount of steamed milk on the side. Made properly a splash of steamed whole milk is added.[citation needed] 
Espresso romano
    An espresso romano is a shot of espresso with a slice of lemon served on the side. The lemon can be run along the rim of the cup as a way to accentuate the espresso's sweetness.[40] Despite the name, it has no link to Italy nor Rome.[citation needed] 
Espresso Sara
    An espresso Sara originates from the municipality of Budoia in Northern Italy. Similar to caffè americano, it is a single shot of espresso but instead of dilution with hot water, cold water is used.[citation needed] 
Guillermo
    Originally one or two shots of hot espresso poured over slices of lime. It can also be served on ice, sometimes with a touch of milk.[citation needed] 
Ristretto
    Ristretto is traditionally a short shot of espresso made with the normal amount of ground coffee but extracted with about half the amount of water. Since ristrettos are essentially the first half of a full-length extraction, the faster-to-extract compounds predominate in a ristretto. The opposite of a ristretto is a lungo, which is typically double the shot volume. Ristretto means "limited" or "restricted" in Italian whereas lungo means "long."[citation needed] Straight ristrettos—shots that are traditionally drunk from a demitasse and not diluted into a larger cup containing milk or water—could be described as bolder, fuller, with more body, and less bitterness, but with a higher concentration of acidity. These characteristics are usually attributed to espresso in general but are more pronounced in a ristretto. Diluted into a cup of water (to make an americano or long black) or milk (e.g. latte and cappuccino), ristrettos are less bitter and exhibit a more intense espresso character.[41] 
Melbourne Magic
    Originally two shots of hot ristretto three-quarter flat white.[42][43] 

Combinations
Coffee with milk
This section is an excerpt from Milk coffee.[edit]
Coffee with milk

Milk coffee is a category of coffee-based drinks made with milk.
Johan Nieuhof, the Dutch ambassador to China, is credited as the first person to drink coffee with milk when he experimented with it around 1660.[44]
Coffee with condensed milk

Café bombón was made popular in Valencia, Spain, and spread gradually to the rest of the country. It might have been re-created and modified to suit European tastebuds as in many parts of Asia such as Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and Singapore. The same recipe for coffee which is called Kopi Susu Panas (Malaysia), or Gafeh Rorn [lit: hot coffee] (Thailand) has already been around for decades and is very popular in mamak stalls and kopitiams in Malaysia. The iced version is known as cà phê đá in Vietnam. A café bombón, however, uses espresso served with sweetened condensed milk in a 1:1 ratio whereas the Asian version uses ground coffee and sweetened condensed milk at different ratios. On the Canary Islands a variety named café proprio or largo condensada is served using the same amount of condensed milk but with "café largo" or espresso lungo. For café bombón, the condensed milk is added to the espresso. For visual effect, a glass is used, and the condensed milk is added slowly to sink underneath the coffee and create two separate bands of contrasting colour – though these layers are customarily stirred together before consumption. Some establishments merely serve an espresso with a sachet of condensed milk for patrons to make themselves.[citation needed]
Coffee with coconut milk

There is a coffee drink combined with coconut milk from Blora, Indonesia. It is called kopi santen (Javanese) or kopi santan (Indonesian). Formulated for the first time in 1980 by a grandmother named Sakijah.[45]
Slow-brewed and espresso

Regular coffee (slow brewed as with a filter or cafetière) is sometimes combined with espresso to increase either the intensity of the flavour or the caffeine content.[46] This may be called a variety of names, most commonly red eye,[47] or shot in the dark.[48][49] Coffeehouse chains may have their own names, such as turbo at Dunkin' Donuts.[50] and depth charge – a federally registered trademark of Caribou Coffee.[51] At Starbucks, a double shot of espresso in the coffee may be termed a "black eye", and a triple shot a "dead eye". "Caffè Tobio" is a version with an equal amount of coffee to espresso.[52] A quad shot into a 16oz of coffee is called a “Hate Myself”[52]
Coffee with tea

    Black tie is a drink made by mixing traditional Thai iced tea, which is a spicy and sweet mixture of chilled black tea, orange blossom water, star anise, crushed tamarind, sugar and condensed milk or cream, with a double shot of espresso.[citation needed]
    Numerous houses use the term chai latte to indicate that the steamed milk of a normal caffè latte is being flavoured with a spiced tea concentrate instead of with espresso. Add espresso shots for a dirty chai latte. Spiced chai (also known by the redundant term "chai tea") with a single shot of espresso. In addition, 1–2 tablespoons of instant espresso may be brewed while simultaneously steeping chai in the same container; a small amount of a dairy or non-dairy drink of choice is usually added to complete the drink.[citation needed]
    Red tie is a drink made by mixing traditional Thai iced tea, which is a spicy and sweet mixture of chilled black tea, orange blossom water, star anise, crushed tamarind, sugar and condensed milk or cream, with a single shot of espresso.[citation needed]
    Yuenyeung is a popular drink in Hong Kong, made of a mixture of coffee and Hong Kong-style milk tea. It was originally served at dai pai dongs (open space food vendors) and cha chaan tengs (cafe), but is now available in various types of restaurants. It can be served hot or cold. The name yuanyang, which refers to mandarin ducks, is a symbol of conjugal love in Chinese culture, as the birds usually appear in pairs and the male and female look very different. This same connotation of "pair" of two unlike items is used to name this drink.[citation needed]

Liqueur coffee
Bailey's Irish Cream and coffee
Main article: Liqueur coffee
Main category: Alcoholic coffee drinks
Not to be confused with Coffee liqueurs.

A liqueur coffee is a coffee brew with a 25-milliliter (0.85 U.S. fl oz; 0.88 imp fl oz) shot of liqueur. This brew is usually served in a clear liqueur coffee glass with the coffee and cream separated for visual and taste effect. The liqueur of choice is added first with a teaspoon of sugar mixed in. The glass is then filled to within 2.5 cm (1 inch) of the top with filtered coffee. Slightly whipped cream may then be poured over the back of a spoon, so that it floats on top of the coffee and liqueur mixture. The sugar is required in the coffee mixture to help the cream float.[citation needed]

The caffeine content of these drinks, to the extent that caffeine is present in them, will not prevent intoxication from their alcohol content. Instead, the caffeine may mask the true degree of ethanol-induced loss of coordination.

    Barraquito is an old drink from Tenerife combining espresso, condensed sweetened milk, foamed milk, lemon, cinnamon and Licor 43, which was carried across the Atlantic in a later modified form as the Carajillo.
    Caffè corretto (that is an Italian drink, consists of a shot of espresso "corrected" with a shot of liquor, usually grappa, brandy or sambuca.)
    Ponce, a hot drink, akin to tea grog (the name itself is a calque of punch) originating in Leghorn port: a shot of espresso poured on top of rum made hot with the espresso machine steamer. A lemon zest is often added.
    A carajillo is a Spanish drink combining coffee with brandy, whisky, anisette, or rum. It is typical of Spain and according to folk etymology, its origin dates to the Spanish occupation of Cuba. The troops combined coffee with rum to give them courage (coraje in Spanish, hence "corajillo" and more recently "carajillo"). There are many different ways of making a carajillo, ranging from black coffee with the spirit simply poured in to heating the spirit with lemon, sugar and cinnamon and adding the coffee last. A similar Italian drink is known as caffè corretto. The American version of a Spanish Coffee uses a heated sugar-rimmed Spanish coffee mug with 3⁄4 US fluid ounce (22 ml; 0.78 imp fl oz) of rum and 1⁄2 US fluid ounce (15 ml; 0.52 imp fl oz) of triple sec. The drink is then flamed to caramelize the sugar, with 2 US fluid ounces (59 ml; 2.1 imp fl oz) of coffee liqueur then added to put out the flame, and then topped off with 3 to 4 US fluid ounces (89 to 118 ml; 3.1 to 4.2 imp fl oz) of coffee, and whipped cream.
    Hasseltse koffie, Vlaamse koffie or Afzakkertje (coffee with Hasseltse jenever).
    Hotshot is a Swedish shot with 1 part Galliano, 1 part coffee and 1 part heavy cream.
    Irish coffee
    Karsk, kaffegök or svartkopp (coffee with moonshine)
    Rüdesheimer Kaffee is an alcoholic coffee drink from Rüdesheim in Germany invented in 1957 by Hans Karl Adam. It is made with Asbach Uralt brandy with coffee and sugar, and is topped with whipped cream.
    A Pharisäer (Danish: farisæer), meaning a Pharisee, is an alcoholic coffee drink that is popular in the Nordfriesland district of Germany. It consists of a mug of black coffee, a double shot of rum, and a topping of whipped cream. In 1981, a court in Flensburg ruled that 2 cl (0.70 imperial fluid ounces; 0.68 US fluid ounces) of rum were not sufficient for preparing a genuine Pharisäer.[53]
    A gunfire has its origins in the British Army, typically made by mixing black tea with rum, though in Australia and New Zealand it is more often made with black coffee instead. On ANZAC Day, this version is served to soldiers before dawn services as part of the "gunfire breakfast".

Flavoured

Some coffeehouses provide flavoured syrups which customers can have added to their coffee drinks. Some non-dairy creamers have flavoured versions, such as hazelnut flavour and Irish Cream flavour (the latter is non-alcoholic). Other flavored coffees are named, and offered at coffee houses either globally or regionally.

Cafe con Miel

A cafe con miel or café miel has a shot of espresso, steamed milk, cinnamon, and honey. The name comes from the Spanish word for honey, miel.[54]

Café de olla

Café de olla or pot coffee is a traditional coffee-based drink prepared using earthen clay pots or jars in Mexico and other Latin American countries. It is flavored with cinnamon and piloncillo. Consumed primarily in colder weathers, usually with the merienda meal, and accompanied with pan dulce pastries.[55]

Espressino or Marocchino

The marocchino is made from espresso, steamed milk, and a dusting of cocoa powder, similar to the espressino.[56][57]

Mocha or café mocha or mochaccino or rápido y sucio

A mocha latte in Costa Rica

A café mocha is a variant of a caffè latte. Like a latte, it is typically one third espresso and two thirds steamed milk, but a portion of chocolate is added, typically in the form of a chocolate syrup, although other vending systems use instant chocolate powder. Mochas can contain dark or milk chocolate.[58]

The term moccaccino is used in some regions of Europe and the Middle East to describe caffè latte with cocoa or chocolate. In the U.S. it usually refers to a cappuccino made with chocolate.[59]

A cafe borgia is a mocha with orange rind and sometimes orange flavoring added. Often served with whipped cream and topped with cinnamon.[60]

A café rápido y sucio, or a quick & dirty coffee, is three shots of espresso topped with chocolate or mocha syrup. Unlike a café mocha which has milk added or an Americano which has water added, a Café Rápido y Sucio or a Quick & Dirty Coffee is espresso and chocolate only. Any variation of this drink containing more than three shots of espresso would be referred to as a Fast & Filthy Coffee.[61]

Melya

Melya is coffee flavoured with cocoa powder and honey.[62] Cream is sometimes added.[62]

Pedrocchi or Paduan Coffee

A mint coffee that originated from the city of Padua in the Caffè Pedrocchi. It is indeed known in Padua as Pedrocchi; while in the rest of Italy as Caffè Padovano,[63] which can be translated as Paduan Coffee. It is made of a lower layer of hot espresso coffee, a middle thick layer of fresh cream and mint syrup, and an upper thin layer of cocoa powder.[64][65] The beverage is not to be stirred nor added with sugar.
Iced
Frappé

A café frappé

Greek frappé (Café frappé) (Greek: φραπές), sometimes called a javaccino[66][67][68] by independent coffeehouses, is a foam-covered iced coffee drink made from spray-dried instant coffee. It is very popular in Greece especially during summer but has now spread on to other countries.

There are numerous ways in which this coffee can be tailored to the individual's taste, such as: all water-no milk; half-half; all milk and; varying levels of sweetness. Frappe is also extremely popular in Cyprus where fresh milk is used as opposed to condensed. In French, when describing a drink, the word frappé means shaken or chilled; however, in popular Greek culture, the word frappé is predominantly taken to refer to the shaking associated with the preparation of a café frappé.[citation needed]
Greek Freddo preparations
Freddo espresso

Freddo espresso is a foam-topped iced coffee made from espresso that is commonplace in Greece. It consists of two shots of espresso (30–50 ml [1.1–1.8 imp fl oz; 1.0–1.7 US fl oz]), sugar (granules or syrup), and ice (60–100 ml [2.1–3.5 imp fl oz; 2.0–3.4 US fl oz]) 1:2 (espresso shots:ice). The espresso is mixed with the sugar and ice in a frapièra (a drink mixer), which cools the espresso and produces a foam from the oils of the coffee. This mixture is then poured over ice into a serving glass.
Freddo cappuccino

Freddo cappuccino is another variation of the original cappuccino and is as popular as the freddo espresso. It follows the same process as the freddo espresso but is topped with a cold milk froth called afrógala (Greek: αφρόγαλα) which is added in ratio 1:2 (espresso shots:milk), and 1:2 (espresso shots:ice). The choice of milk used to create the afrógala may vary from fresh to condensed. Recently the Coffee Island coffee shop (a coffee shop franchise in Greece), established a new foam and cream trend in freddo cappuccino. They use plant-based milk creamed in the frapièra. The result is a stiffer and sweeter cream.
Other

Mazagran
    Mazagran (sometimes misspelled as Mazagrin) is a cold coffee drink that originated in Algeria. It is typically served in a tall glass and is made with coffee and ice. Sometimes sugar, rum, lemon or water is added. Sometimes a fast version is achieved by pouring a previously sweetened espresso in a cup with ice cubes and a slice of lemon.[citation needed]
Palazzo
    A Palazzo is an iced coffee variant, popular in Southern California. It is two shots of espresso, chilled immediately after brewing and mixed with sweetened cream. A Palazzo is typically made using a moka pot.[citation needed]
Ice shot
    Originating in Australia and similar to the Mazagran, the minimal ice shot is a single shot of fresh espresso poured into an ordinary latté glass that has been filled with ice. The hot coffee, in melting some of the ice is diluted, re-freezing to a granita-like texture. The addition of a single scoop of ice-cream on top is a popular variant. No milk, sugar, extra flavouring or cream are involved.[citation needed]
Shakerato
    Shakerato is an iced coffee made by shaking espresso and ice cubes.
Espresso and tonic
    An espresso and tonic is a non-alcoholic mixed drink made by mixing espresso and tonic water.

Instant coffee
Instant coffee

Instant coffee is a drink derived from brewed coffee beans. Through various manufacturing processes the coffee is dehydrated into the form of powder or granules. These can be rehydrated with hot water to provide a drink similar (though not identical) to conventional coffee. At least one brand of instant coffee, Camp Coffee, is also available in concentrated liquid form.

Instant coffee is used as an ingredient in other coffee drinks. Indian beaten coffee is made from instant coffee whipped with sugar and served over warm milk. A Korean drink known as dalgona coffee is prepared similarly but can be served hot or cold. A Greek frappé coffee is made again from instant coffee, sugar, and milk, but it is prepared in a cocktail shaker.

Instant coffee brands include:

    UCC
    Chock full o'Nuts
    Folgers
    Kenco
    Lavazza
    Maxwell House
    Moccona
    Mr. Brown Coffee
    Nescafé
    Sanka

Decaffeinated

A decaffeination process removes caffeine from coffee beans to lower their caffeine content.[69] Four main methods are used to extract caffeine from coffee beans:

    Soaking the beans in water, a method said to have been developed in Switzerland
    Washing beans in a solution of water and ethyl acetate
    Applying carbon dioxide, either as a liquid or in a supercritical state, to beans at high pressure
    Dissolving the caffeine with the solvent dichloromethane[70]

Decaffeinated coffee grew in popularity over the last half of the 20th century, mainly due to health concerns that arose regarding the over-consumption of caffeine.[71][72][73] Decaffeinated coffee, sometimes known as "decaf", may be drunk as regular brewed coffee, instant, espresso, or as a mix of regular caffeine beans and decaffeinated beans.[74][75] Ludwig Roselius, a German coffee merchant and founder of the company Kaffee HAG, is credited with the development of commercial decaffeination of coffee.[76]
Other
Affogato al caffè
An affogato

An affogato (Italian for "drowned") is vanilla gelato with hot espresso poured over it.[77] Affogato style, which refers to the act of topping a drink or dessert with espresso, may also incorporate caramel sauce or chocolate sauce. When ordered, an affogato tends to be served with scoops of ice cream with a shot (or 2) of espresso poured over the top, sometimes mixed with a liqueur. A white affogato is the same as a regular affogato, just with milk added.[citation needed]
Babyccino

A babyccino is frothed up milk and warm milk in an espresso cup prepared for young children, a cappuccino for babies. The split should be about 80% foam and 20% warm milk with a sprinkling of cacao powder on top. The foam should be oxygenated pillows of foam and the temperature of the milk should be about 40.5 °C (105 °F). This is so the natural sweetness of the milk can be best maintained. The drink originated in Sydney, Australia, in the late 1980s by the famed Zigolini's coffee house.
Caffè Medici

A caffè Medici is a doppio poured over chocolate syrup and orange peel, usually topped with whipped cream. The drink originated at Seattle's historic Last Exit on Brooklyn coffeehouse.[78]
Café Touba

Café Touba is the spiritual drink of Senegal, named after Cheik Ahmadou Bamba Mbacké (known as Serigne Touba) and the holy city of Touba in Senegal.[79] During the roasting process, the coffee beans are mixed with grains of selim, and sometimes other spices, and ground into powder after roasting.[79] The drink is prepared using a filter, similar to plain coffee. Sugar is often added before drinking.[79]
Canned coffee

Canned coffee is ubiquitous in Japan and throughout East Asia, with a large number of companies competing fiercely and offering various types for sale. Canned coffee is already brewed and ready to drink. It is available in supermarkets and convenience stores,[80] with vast numbers of cans being sold in vending machines[81] that offer heated cans in the autumn and winter,[82] and cold cans in the warm months.

Some brands in the United States have recently begun selling similar products in gas stations, grocery stores, and corner stores, though it is not nearly as widespread as the Japanese version is in Japan.[83][84] Brands of canned coffee include these:

    UCC
    Folgers
    Mr. Brown Coffee

Coffee beer

Coffee beer is a drink from Jombang, Indonesia. The composition of coffee beer is coffee, sugar, water, caramel, and soda. Usually, the drink is served in a glass filled with ice cubes to add freshness to the drink. It contains no alcohol.[85]
Coffee milk
Coffee milk
Prepared coffee milk in a supermarket dairy case
The ingredients for preparing coffee milk: coffee syrup and milk

Coffee milk is sold in two ways: prepared coffee milk and coffee syrup. It is a drink prepared or made by adding a sweetened coffee concentrate called coffee syrup to milk in a manner similar to chocolate milk. It is the official drink of Rhode Island in the United States.[86] Coffee milk brands include:

    Farmers Union Iced Coffee (Australia) marketed as iced coffee
    Autocrat, LLC

It is popular in South Australia where it is known as iced coffee but that should not be confused with the drink of the same name made from coffee with ice but without milk or with little milk that is popular in the United States and other countries.
Double-double

Double-double or Double Double is a uniquely Canadian term that is also a registered trademark of Tim Hortons.[87] This menu item consists of a cup of drip coffee with two creams and two sugars (or double cream, double sugar). The chain achieves flavor consistency across cup sizes by employing a pair of countertop vending machines, one dispensing cream and milk and the other dispensing white granulated sugar, with buttons for different cup sizes and amounts. The coffee is always poured over the cream and sugar to achieve the correct volume of ingredients. The drink can be made with cream or milk. Additional terms include the menu item "Regular" (one shot of each); a "triple-triple" (three shots of each); a "four-by-four" (four shots of each);[88] and a "Wayne Gretzky" (nine shots of each). A "Wayne Gretzky" is more of a legend or joke than a feasible order; for comparison, a medium Regular has 6g fat and 11g sugar[89] (approximately 3 tsp of cream and 2 1/2 tsp white sugar), so a Wayne Gretzky in a medium size would have nine times that amount: 54g fat and 99g of sugar, approximately 1/2 cup cream (27 teaspoons, or 118ml, or 4oz) and 2/5 cups of sugar (22 1/2 teaspoons). A medium cup is approximately 14oz (414ml),[90] and would consist almost entirely of the cream and sugar.
Egg coffee

Egg coffee (Vietnamese: Cà phê trứng) is a Vietnamese drink from Hanoi with thick texture traditionally prepared with egg yolks, sugar, condensed milk and drip coffee.
Indian filter coffee

South Indian coffee, also known as Madras filter coffee, Kumbakonam degree coffee, Mylapore filter coffee, Mysore filter coffee, Palakkad Iyer coffee or South Indian Filter Coffee (Kaapi) or kaapi (South Indian phonetic rendering of "coffee") is a sweet milky coffee made from dark roasted coffee beans (70–80%) and chicory (20–30%), especially popular in the southern states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The most commonly used coffee beans are Koffeey Arabica (Coffee Arabica grown from Arehalli Village) Peaberry (preferred), Arabica, Malabar and Robusta grown in the hills of Karnataka (Kodagu, Chikkamagaluru), Kerala (Malabar region) and Tamil Nadu (Nilgiris District, Yercaud and Kodaikanal).[citation needed]
Pocillo

A shot or small portion of unsweetened coffee, now usually made either using an espresso machine or a moka pot, but traditionally made using a cloth drip, usually served in cups made for the purpose, called "tacitas de pocillo". It is widely drunk in Latin America, usually as an afternoon or after-dinner coffee. The defining feature is the size, usually half to a quarter the size of the usual ~240-milliliter (8 U.S. fl oz; 8.3 imp fl oz) coffee cups. There are a number of small-sized drinks that use tacitas de pocillo, including such sweetened varieties as café cubano and café cortado, but these are usually not called a pocillo; rather, the Spanish diminutive suffix "-ito" is usually added to the name of the drink wanted in a pocillo size cup. For example, a pocillo-sized cortado is usually called a cortadito.[citation needed] 

The history of coffee dates back centuries, first from its origin in Ethiopia and later in Yemen. It was already known in Mecca in the 15th century. Also, in the 15th century, Sufi monasteries in Yemen employed coffee as an aid to concentration during prayers.[1] Coffee later spread to the Levant in the early 16th century; it caused some controversy on whether it was halal in Ottoman and Mamluk society. Coffee arrived in Italy in the second half of the 16th century through commercial Mediterranean trade routes, while Central and Eastern Europeans learned of coffee from the Ottomans. By the mid 17th century, it had reached India and the East Indies.
Coffeepot (cafetière "campanienne"), part of a service, 1836, hard-paste porcelain, Metropolitan Museum of Art

Coffee houses were established in Western Europe by the late 17th century, especially in Holland, England, and Germany. One of the earliest cultivations of coffee in the New World was when Gabriel de Clieu brought coffee seedlings to Martinique in 1720. These beans later sprouted 18,680 coffee trees which enabled its spread to other Caribbean islands such as Saint-Domingue and also to Mexico. By 1788, Saint-Domingue supplied half the world's coffee.[2]

By 1852, Brazil became the world's largest producer of coffee and has held that status ever since. Since 1950, several other major producers emerged, notably Colombia, Ivory Coast, Ethiopia, and Vietnam; the latter overtook Colombia and became the second-largest producer in 1999.

Today, coffee is one of the world's most popular beverages, with a significant cultural and economic impact globally.
Etymology

The word coffee entered the English language in 1582 via the Dutch koffie, borrowed from the Ottoman Turkish kahve (قهوه), borrowed in turn from the Arabic qahwah (قَهْوَة).[3] Medieval Arab lexicographers traditionally held that the etymology of qahwah meant 'wine', given its distinctly dark color, and derived from the verb qahiya (قَهِيَ), 'to have no appetite'.[4] The word qahwah most likely meant 'dark', referring to the brew or the bean. Semitic languages had the root qhh, "dark color", which became a natural designation for the beverage.[4] There is no evidence that the word qahwah was named after the Ethiopian province of Kaffa (a part of where coffee originates from: Abyssinia),[4] or any significant authority stating the opposite, or that it is traced to the Arabic quwwa ("power").[3][1] A different term for 'coffee', widespread in languages of Ethiopia, is buna, bun, būn or buni (depending on the language). Most often the word group has been assumed to originate from Arabic bunn (بن) meaning specifically the coffee bean, but indigenous origin in Cushitic has been proposed as a possibility as well.[5][6]

The Ottomans' dominant position in the trade in coffee is thought to have influenced several other European languages as well, inspiring "caffè" in Italian and "café" in French. These terms, along with the Dutch koffie emerged at roughly the same time [citation needed], reflecting the beverage's newfound spread across Europe. The terms coffee pot and coffee break originated in 1705 and 1952 respectively.[7]
Genetics

Studies of genetic diversity have been performed on Coffea arabica varieties, which were found to be of low diversity but with retention of some residual heterozygosity from ancestral materials, and closely related diploid species Coffea canephora and C. liberica;[8] however, no direct evidence has ever been found indicating where in Africa coffee grew or who among the local people might have used it as a stimulant or known about it there earlier than the seventeenth century.[1] The original domesticated coffee plant is said to have been from Harar, and the native population is thought to be derived from Ethiopia with distinct nearby populations in Sudan and Kenya.[9][10]
History
18th century French plan of Mocha, Yemen. The Somali, Jewish and European quarters are located outside the citadel. The Dutch, English, Turkish and French trading posts are inside the city walls.
Syrian Bedouin from a beehive village in Aleppo, Syria, sipping the traditional murra (bitter) coffee, 1930
Palestinian women grinding coffee, 1905

The earliest mention of coffee noted by the literary coffee merchant Philippe Sylvestre Dufour[11] is a reference to bunchum in the works of the 10th century CE Persian physician Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi, known as Rhazes in the West.[12] More definite information on the coffee tree and preparation of a beverage from the roasted coffee berries dates back to the late 15th century. The Sufi Imam Muhammad Ibn Said al-Dhabhani is known to have imported goods from Ethiopia to Yemen.[1] Coffee was first exported out of Ethiopia to Yemen by Somali merchants from Berbera and Zeila, which was procured from Harar and the Abyssinian interior. According to Captain Haines, who was the colonial administrator of Aden (1839–1854), Mocha historically imported up to two-thirds of their coffee from Berbera-based merchants before the coffee trade of Mocha was captured by British-controlled Aden in the 19th century. Thereafter, much of the Ethiopian coffee was exported to Aden via Berbera.[13]

    Berbera not only supplies Aden with horned cattle and sheep to a very large extent, but the trade between Africa and Aden is steadily increasing greatly every year. In the article of coffee alone there is considerable export, and 'Berbera' coffee stands in the Bombay market now before Mocha. The coffee shipped at Berbera comes from far in the interior from Hurrar, Abyssinia, and Kaffa. It will be to the advantage of all that the trade should come to Aden through one port, and Berbera is the only place on the coast there that has a protected port, where vessels can lie in smooth water.[14]

One of the most important of the early writers on coffee was Abd al-Qadir al-Jaziri, who in 1587 compiled a work tracing the history and legal controversies of coffee entitled Umdat al Safwa fi hill al-qahwa عمدة الصفوة في حل القهوة,[15][16] tracing the spread of coffee from Arabia Felix (present-day Yemen) northward to Mecca and Medina, and then to the larger cities of Cairo, Damascus, Baghdad, and Constantinople. He reported that one Sheikh, Jamal-al-Din al-Dhabhani (d. 1470), mufti of Aden, was the first to adopt the use of coffee (circa 1454).

    He found that among its properties was that it drove away fatigue and lethargy, and brought to the body a certain sprightliness and vigour.[1]

Al-Jaziri's manuscript work is of considerable interest with regard to the history of coffee in Europe as well. A copy reached the French royal library, where it was translated in part by Antoine Galland as De l'origine et du progrès du café (1699).
Middle East

Sufis in Yemen used the beverage as an aid to concentration and as a kind of spiritual intoxication when they chanted the name of God.[17] Sufis used it to keep themselves alert during their nighttime devotions. By 1414, the plant was known in Mecca, and in the early 1500s was spreading to the Mameluke Sultanate of Egypt and North Africa from the Yemeni port of Mocha.[9][17] Associated with Sufism, a myriad of coffee houses popped up in Cairo (Egypt) around the religious University of the Azhar. These coffee houses also opened in Syria, especially in the cosmopolitan city of Aleppo,[17] and then in Constantinople, the capital of the Ottoman Empire, in 1554.[17] Coffee was also noted in Aleppo by the German physician botanist Leonhard Rauwolf, the first European to mention it, as chaube, in 1573; Rauwolf was closely followed by descriptions from other European travellers.[18]: 2? 

In 1511, it was forbidden for its stimulating effect by conservative, orthodox imams at a theological court in Mecca.[15] However, these bans were to be overturned in 1524 by an order of the Ottoman Turkish Sultan Suleiman I, with Grand Mufti Mehmet Ebussuud el-İmadi issuing a fatwa allowing the consumption of coffee.[19] In Cairo a similar ban was instituted in 1532, and the coffeehouses and warehouses containing coffee beans were sacked.[20] During the 16th century, it had already reached the rest of the Middle East, the Safavid Empire and the Ottoman Empire. From the Middle East, coffee drinking spread to Italy, then to the rest of Europe, and coffee plants were transported by the Dutch to the East Indies and to the Americas.[21]
Coffee regulation in Ethiopia

Coffee was banned by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church sometime before the 18th century.[22] However, in the second half of the 19th century, Ethiopian attitudes softened towards coffee drinking, and its consumption spread rapidly between 1880 and 1886; according to Richard Pankhurst, "this was largely due to Emperor Menelik, who himself drank it, and to Abuna Matewos who did much to dispel the belief of the clergy that it was a Muslim drink."[23]: 198 
Coffee in Islam

Early practitioners of Islamic medicine and science fought against the notion that the effect of coffee was like that of hashish or alcohol, and instead argued the benefits of the drink, which would stimulate the mind while protecting against the allure of alcohol and hashish.[24] Coffeehouses in Mecca, Yemen, and Cairo began to explode in popularity, and they would soon become centers of public life within the sprawling cities of the Islamic Empires. The coffeehouses sometimes acted like the bayt al-Hakima or madrasas, which were centers of Islamic life, arts, and thinking. Neha Verami, from the Folger Shakespeare Library, said that "the history of these coffeehouses offers three connected insights: the emergence of the public sphere, the participation of larger sections of the population in the political lives of the early modern Islamic empires, and the hollowness of the allegations of despotism mounted on 'Oriental' societies by Western onlookers".[25] Coffee became an ingrained piece of Islamic culture for the centuries to come.

Contrary to its role in recent centuries, coffee became a subject of debate for some. When the fatwa came into effect in 1532–1533, coffee and its consumption was established as haram.[26] This decision most likely came from the idea that like alcohol, coffee had an effect on cognition, albeit different and milder. It is possible that the regulation was implemented in an attempt to limit consumption of other recreational substances such as tobacco and alcohol in the Ottoman and Safavid Empires.[27] Drinking coffee in public places was also scorned. Not only was public consumption seen as taboo, but people would often drink from a communal bowl in a fashion similar to drinking wine.[28] This most likely contributed to the disdain of coffee because its similar style of consumption once again related it to alcohol.

An effort was made to stunt coffee's growing popularity. While Suleiman I was still in power, taxes were imposed in an attempt to prevent both bureaucrats and those who were unemployed from consuming coffee.[28] Further attempts occurred during both the reigns of Sultan Selim II in 1567 as well as Sultan Murad III in 1583 whenever those of more modest means began to drink coffee, which included professions ranging from craftsmen to shopkeepers to local soldiers.[28] Despite the attempt to bar people from drinking coffee, the fatwa ultimately failed as coffee did not compare to the effects of alcohol.[26] Since coffee was also seen as a mind-altering substance like alcohol meant that the prohibition was more of a misunderstanding of the substance or an attempt to control consumption based on Orthodox beliefs. This back-and-forth scenario falls within the debate of whether coffee is halal or haram.[26] While it certainly proved controversial, coffee continued to be sought out by many.

Within the Ottoman Empire, shops known as taḥmīskhāne in Ottoman Turkish were used to create coffee using the traditional method of roasting and crushing coffee beans in mortars.[28] Coffee houses located in areas such as Mecca were visited by those from all over: Muslims from mosques, those coming from afar to trade and sell, or simple travelers making their way through.[26]

Despite the controversy over coffee, it was one of the keys to the economy around the Red Sea from the mid-15th century to the mid-17th century.[29] In the past, the Oromo tribe in Ethiopia created foods from coffee plants such as bunna qela, made of butter, salt, and roasted beans.[29] Such a concoction would be used as a basis and altered over time. A more modern beverage known as qishr in Arabic is made of recycled dried cherry skins that would have normally been discarded after being used to create the beverage buna.[29] These cherry skins would then be used to brew a sort of fruit tea. Qishr or cascara in Spanish is sold by coffee farmers even today.[29]
Legendary accounts

There are several legendary accounts of the origin of the consumption of coffee. According to one legend, ancestors of today's Kafficho people in the Kingdom of Kaffa were the first to recognize the energizing effect of the coffee plant.[1] One account involves a 9th-century Ethiopian goatherder, Kaldi, who, noticing the energizing effects when his flock nibbled on the bright red berries of a certain bush, chewed on the fruit himself. His exhilaration prompted him to bring the berries to a monk in a nearby monastery. But the monk disapproved of their use and threw them into the fire, from which an enticing aroma billowed, causing other monks to come and investigate. The roasted beans were quickly raked from the embers, ground up, and dissolved in hot water, yielding the world's first cup of coffee. Since this story is not known to have appeared in writing before Rome-based Maronite Faustus Nairon's De Saluberrima potione Cahue seu Cafe nuncupata Discurscus in 1671, 800 years after it was supposed to have taken place, it is highly likely to be apocryphal.[1]

Another account involves the 13th century Moroccan Sufi mystic Ghothul Akbar Nooruddin Abu al-Hasan al-Shadhili.[30] When traveling in Ethiopia, the legend goes, he observed birds of unusual vitality feeding on berries, and, upon trying the berries, experienced the same vitality. Yet another attributes the discovery of coffee to Sheikh Abu al-Hasan ash-Shadhili's disciple, Omar. According to the ancient chronicle (preserved in the Abd-Al-Kadir manuscript), Omar, who was known for his ability to cure the sick through prayer, was once banished from Mecca to a desert cave near the Ousab City. Starving, Omar chewed berries from nearby shrubbery, but found them to be too bitter. He tried roasting the beans to improve the flavor, but they became too hard. He then tried boiling them to soften the bean, which resulted in a fragrant brown liquid. After drinking the liquid, Omar was revived and survived for days. As stories of this "miracle drug" reached Mecca, Omar was asked to return and was eventually made a saint.[18]: 9–10 

Nepenthe /nɪˈpɛnθi/ (Ancient Greek: νηπενθές, nēpenthés) is possibly derived from a misunderstanding of coffee in the Homeric cycle. It is mentioned as originating in Egypt.[31] The word nepenthe first appears in the fourth book of Homer's Odyssey:

ἔνθ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ ἐνόησ᾽ Ἑλένη Διὸς ἐκγεγαυῖα:
αὐτίκ᾽ ἄρ᾽ εἰς οἶνον βάλε φάρμακον, ἔνθεν ἔπινον,
νηπενθές τ᾽ ἄχολόν τε, κακῶν ἐπίληθον ἁπάντων.
	

Then Helen, daughter of Zeus, took other counsel.
Straightway she cast into the wine of which they were drinking a drug
to quiet all pain and strife, and bring forgetfulness of every ill.
—Odyssey, Book 4, v. 219–221[32] 	

Figuratively, nepenthe means "that which chases away sorrow". Literally it means 'not-sorrow' or 'anti-sorrow': νη-, nē-, i.e. "not" (privative prefix),[33] and πενθές, from πένθος, pénthos, i.e. "grief, sorrow, or mourning".[34]

In the Odyssey, νηπενθές φάρμακον : nēpenthés phármakon (i.e. an anti-sorrow drug) is a magical potion given to Helen by Polydamna, the wife of the noble Egyptian Thon,

Coffee was originally consumed in the Islamic world and was directly related to religious practices.[35] For example, coffee helped its consumers fast in the day and stay awake at night, during the Muslim celebration of Ramadan.[36]: 88–89 

    It [coffee] became associated with Muhammad's birthday. Indeed, various legends ascribed coffee's origins to Muhammad, who, through the archangel Gabriel, brought it to man to replace the wine which Islam forbade.[36]: 89 

Europe
Dutch engraving of Mocha in 1692

Coffee was first introduced to Europe in Hungary when the Turks invaded Hungary at the Battle of Mohács in 1526. Within a year, coffee had reached Vienna by the same Turks who fought the Europeans at the Siege of Vienna (1529).[37] Later in the 16th century, coffee was introduced on the island of Malta through slavery. Turkish Muslim slaves had been imprisoned by the Knights of St John in 1565—the year of the Great Siege of Malta, and they used them to make their traditional beverage. Domenico Magri mentioned in his work Virtu del Kafé, "Turks, most skillful makers of this concoction." Also, the German traveler Gustav Sommerfeldt in 1663 wrote "the ability and industriousness with which the Turkish prisoners earn some money, especially by preparing coffee, a powder resembling snuff tobacco, with water and sugar." Coffee was a popular beverage in Maltese high society—many coffee shops opened.[38]

The first mention of coffee in a European text is in Charles de l'Ecluse's Aromatum et simplicium aliquot medica-mentorum apud Indos nascientum historia from 1575. He learnt of coffee from Alphoncius Pansius in Padua.[39] Englishmen passing through Safavid and the Ottoman Empire in the late 16th century noted that coffee was "very good to help digestion, to quicken the spirits, and to cleanse the blood.”[25]

The vibrant trade between the Republic of Venice and the people of North Africa, Egypt, and the East brought a large variety of African goods, including coffee, to this leading European port. Venetian merchants introduced coffee-drinking to the wealthy in Venice, charging them heavily for the beverage.[40] In this way, coffee was introduced to the mainland of Europe. In 1591 Venetian botanist-physician Prospero Alpini became the first to publish a description of the coffee plant in Europe.[41] The first European coffee house apart from those in the Ottoman Empire and in Malta was opened in Venice in 1645.[21]

The first route of travel for coffee was through the massive, sprawling Ottoman Empire that allowed transportation of goods such as coffee to make their way well into Europe, and the second route of travel was from the port of Mocha in Yemen,[42] where the East India Trading Co. bought coffee in masses and transported it back to mainland Europe. Coffee became a crucial part of the culture in most of Europe, with queens, kings, and the general public all becoming extensively enthralled with the product. Rather it be through the term 'coffee arabica' or the transportation of the drink, the passage of coffee into the Western world greatly resembles that of the scientific knowledge and discoveries passed on by the Islamicate Empires.
Austria
Coffee house culture between Vienna and Trieste: the coffee, the newspaper, the glass of water and the marble tabletop

The first coffeehouse in Austria opened in Vienna in 1683 after the Battle of Vienna, by using supplies from the spoils obtained after defeating the Turks. The officer who received the coffee beans, Jerzy Franciszek Kulczycki (Georg Franz Kolschitzky), a Polish military officer, opened a coffee house and helped popularize the custom of adding sugar and milk to the coffee.[43] Melange is the typical Viennese coffee, which comes mixed with hot foamed milk, and is usually served with a glass of water.

A distinct Viennese coffee house culture developed in Vienna in the 19th century and then spread throughout Central Europe. Scientists, artists, intellectuals, bon vivants and their financiers met in this special microcosm of the Viennese coffee houses of the Habsburg Empire. World-famous personalities such as Gustav Klimt, Sigmund Freud, James Joyce and Egon Schiele were inspired in the Viennese coffee house. In this diverse coffee house culture of the multicultural Habsburg Empire, different types of coffee preparation also developed. This is how the world-famous cappuccino from the Viennese Kapuziner coffee developed over the Italian-speaking parts of the northern Italian empire.[44][45][46]
United Kingdom
A 1652 handbill advertising coffee for sale in St. Michael's Alley, London

The first coffeehouse in England was opened in Oxford in 1650.[47] The first coffeehouse in London opened in St. Michael's Alley in Cornhill, London. The proprietor was Pasqua Rosée, the servant of Daniel Edwards, a trader in Turkish goods. Edwards imported the coffee and assisted Rosée in setting up the establishment. Coffee was also brought in through the British East India Company and the Dutch East India Company in the 17th century. Oxford's Queen's Lane Coffee House, established in 1654, is still in existence today. By 1675, there were more than 3,000 coffeehouses throughout England, but there were many disruptions in the progressive movement of coffeehouses between the 1660s and 1670s.[48] During the enlightenment, these early English coffee houses became gathering places used for deep religious and political discussions among the populace, since it was a rare opportunity for sober discussion.[49] This practice became so common, and potentially subversive, that Charles II made an attempt to crush coffee houses in 1670s.[39]

The banning of women from coffeehouses was not universal, for example, women frequented them in Germany, but it appears to have been commonplace elsewhere in Europe, including in England.[50]

Many in this period believed coffee to have medicinal properties. Renowned and eminent physicians often recommended coffee for medicinal purposes and some prescribed it as a cure for nervous disorders.[51] A 1661 tract entitled "A character of coffee and coffee-houses", written by one "M.P.", lists some of these perceived benefits:

    'Tis extolled for drying up the Crudities of the Stomack, and for expelling Fumes out of the Head. Excellent Berry! which can cleanse the English-man's Stomak of Flegm, and expel Giddinesse out of his Head.

This new commodity proved controversial among some subjects, however. For instance, the anonymous 1674 "Women's Petition Against Coffee" declared:

    the Excessive Use of that Newfangled, Abominable, Heathenish Liquor called COFFEE ...has...Eunucht our Husbands, and Crippled our more kind Gallants, that they are become as Impotent, as Age.[52]

France

Antoine Galland (1646–1715) in his aforementioned translation described the Muslim association with coffee, tea and chocolate: "We are indebted to these great [Arab] physicians for introducing coffee to the modern world through their writings, as well as sugar, tea, and chocolate." Regarding this last, he was quite mistaken however, as chocolate had been brought to Europe from the Americas by the Spanish. Galland reported that he was informed by Mr. de la Croix, the interpreter of King Louis XIV of France, that coffee was brought to Paris by a certain Mr. Thevenot, who had travelled through the East. On his return to that city in 1657, Thevenot gave some of the beans to his friends, one of whom was de la Croix.

In 1669, Soleiman Agha, Ambassador from Sultan Mehmed IV, arrived in Paris with his entourage bringing with him a large quantity of coffee beans. Not only did they provide their French and European guests with coffee to drink, but they also donated some beans to the royal court. Between July 1669 and May 1670, the Ambassador managed to firmly establish the custom of drinking coffee among Parisians.
Germany

In Germany, coffeehouses were first established in North Sea ports, including Wuppertal-Ronsdorf (1673) and Hamburg (1677). Initially, this new beverage was written in the English form coffee, but during the 1700s the Germans gradually adopted the French word café, then slowly changed the spelling to Kaffee, which is the present word. In the 18th century the popularity of coffee gradually spread around the German lands and was taken up by the ruling classes. Coffee was served at the court of the Great Elector, Frederick William of Brandenburg, as early as 1675, but Berlin's first public coffee house did not open until 1721.[53]
Café Zimmermann, Leipzig (engraving by Johann Georg Schreiber, 1732)

Composer Johann Sebastian Bach, who was cantor of St. Thomas Church in Leipzig, in 1723–1750, conducted a musical ensemble at the local Café Zimmermann. Sometime in 1732–1735 he composed the secular "Coffee Cantata" Schweigt stille, plaudert nicht (BWV 211), in which a young woman, Lieschen, pleads with her disapproving father to accept her devotion to drinking coffee, then a newfangled fashion. The libretto includes such lines as:

    Ei! wie schmeckt der Coffee süße,
    Lieblicher als tausend Küsse,
    Milder als Muskatenwein.
    Coffee, Coffee muss ich haben,
    Und wenn jemand mich will laben,
    Ach, so schenkt mir Coffee ein!

    (Oh! How sweet coffee does taste,
    Better than a thousand kisses,
    Milder than muscat wine.
    Coffee, coffee, I've got to have it,
    And if someone wants to perk me up, *
    Oh, just give me a cup of coffee!)

Italy
Pope Clement VIII: The Pope who popularised coffee in Europe among Christians

In Italy, like in most of Europe, coffee arrived in the second half of the 16th century through the commercial routes of the Mediterranean Sea. In 1580 the Venetian botanist and physician Prospero Alpini imported coffee into the Republic of Venice from Egypt,[18]: 610?  and soon coffee shops started opening one by one when coffee spread and became the drink of the intellectuals, of social gatherings, even of lovers as plates of chocolate and coffee were considered a romantic gift. By the year 1763 Venice alone accounted for more than 200 coffee shops,[54] and the health benefits of the miraculous drink were celebrated by many. Some representatives of the Catholic Church opposed coffee at its first introduction in Italy, believing it to be the "Devil's drink",[18]: 24?  but Pope Clement VIII, after trying the aromatic drink himself, gave it his blessing, thus boosting further its commercial success and diffusion. Upon tasting coffee, Pope Clement VIII declared: "Why, this Satan's drink is so delicious that it would be a pity to let the infidels have exclusive use of it."[55] Clement allegedly blessed the bean because it appeared better for the people than alcoholic beverages.[56] The year often cited is 1600. It is not clear whether this is a true story, but it may have been found amusing at the time.[57]

In Turin, in 1933, Italian engineer Luigi Di Ponti invented the first moka pot and subsequently sold the patent to Alfonso Bialetti.[58][47][59] In 1946 Alfonso's son Renato started industrial production, selling millions of moka pots in one year, versus only 70000 sold by his father in the previous 10, making the coffee maker (as well as coffee) an icon of Italy in the world. Naples, albeit being known today as the city of coffee, has seen it later, probably through the ships coming in the ports of Sicily and Naples itself. Some date the Neapolitan discovery of coffee back to 1614, when the composer, explorer and musicologist Pietro Della Valle sent news from the Holy Land, in his letters to the dear friend, physician, poet, Greek scholar and Mario Schipano and his gathering of intellectuals, of a drink (called kahve)[60] the Arab Muslims brewed in hot pots.

Some believe coffee arrived in Naples earlier, from Salerno and its Schola Medica Salernitana, where the plant came to be used for its medicinal properties between the 14th and 15th centuries. Celebrated by Neapolitan art, literature, music and daily social life, coffee soon became a protagonist in Naples, where it was prepared with great care in the "cuccumella", the typical Neapolitan filter coffee pot derived by the invention of the parisian Morize in 1819. Neapolitan artisans came in touch with it when brought, once again through the sea commercial routes, to the Port of Naples. An indication of the approach of Neapolitans to coffee as a social drink, is the practice of the suspended coffee (the act of paying in advance for a coffee to be consumed by the next customer) invented there and defined by the Neapolitan philosopher and writer Luciano De Crescenzo a coffee "given by an individual to mankind".[61]
Netherlands
Further information: Dutch East India Company

The race among Europeans to obtain live coffee trees or beans was eventually won by the Dutch in 1616. Pieter van den Broecke, a Dutch merchant, obtained some of the closely guarded coffee bushes from Mocha, Yemen, in 1616. He took them back to Amsterdam and found a home for them in the Botanical gardens, where they began to thrive. This apparently minor event received little publicity but was to have a major impact on the history of coffee.

The beans that van der Broecke acquired from Mocha forty years earlier adjusted well to conditions in the greenhouses at the Amsterdam Botanical Garden and produced numerous healthy Coffea arabica bushes. In 1658 the Dutch first used them to begin coffee cultivation in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) and later in southern India. They abandoned this cultivation to focus on their Javanese plantations in order to avoid lowering the price by oversupply.[62]

Within a few years, the Dutch colonies (Java in Asia, Suriname in the Americas) had become the main suppliers of coffee to Europe.
Poland

Coffee reached the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in the 17th century, primarily through merchants trading with the neighbouring Ottoman Empire.[63] The first coffee shops opened a century later.[64] The intake of coffee has grown since the change of government in 1989, though consumption per capita is lower than in most European countries.[65] During the Communist period, where there were shortages of everything, including coffee, Poles developed their own substitute to coffee, Inka, made from roasted cereal. Nowadays, Poland is experiencing an explosion of coffee consumption through rapid expansion of cafes, and new trends such as the specialty coffee.
Americas
Coffee plantation

Gabriel de Clieu brought coffee seedlings to Martinique in the Caribbean in 1720. Those sprouts flourished and 50 years later there were 18,680 coffee trees in Martinique enabling the spread of coffee cultivation to Saint-Domingue (Haiti), Mexico and other islands of the Caribbean. The French territory of Saint-Domingue saw coffee cultivated starting in 1734, and by 1788 supplied half the world's coffee. Coffee had a major influence on the geography of Latin America.[66] The French colonial plantations relied heavily on African slave laborers. However, the dreadful conditions that the slaves worked in on coffee plantations were a factor in the soon-to-follow Haitian Revolution. The coffee industry never fully recovered there.[2]: 16 

Coffee also found its way to the Isle of Bourbon, now known as Réunion, in the Indian Ocean. The plant produced smaller beans and was deemed a different variety of arabica known as var. Bourbon. The Santos coffee of Brazil and the Oaxaca coffee of Mexico are the progeny of that Bourbon tree. Circa 1727, the King of Portugal sent Francisco de Melo Palheta to French Guiana to obtain coffee seeds to become a part of the coffee market. Francisco initially had difficulty obtaining these seeds, but he captivated the French Governor's wife, and she sent him enough seeds and shoots to commence the coffee industry of Brazil. However, cultivation did not gather momentum until independence in 1822,[2]: 19  leading to the clearing of massive tracts of the Atlantic Forest, first from the vicinity of Rio and later São Paulo for coffee plantations.[2]: 20–24  In 1893, the coffee from Brazil was introduced into Kenya and Tanzania (Tanganyika), not far from its place of origin in Ethiopia, 600 years prior, ending its transcontinental journey.[67]

After the Boston Tea Party of 1773, large numbers of Americans switched to drinking coffee during the American Revolution because drinking tea had become unpatriotic.[68][69][70][71][72][73]

Cultivation was taken up by many countries in the latter half of the 19th century, and in almost all of them it involved the large-scale displacement and exploitation of indigenous people. Harsh conditions led to many uprisings, coups and bloody suppressions of peasants.[2]: 33–34  For example, Guatemala started producing coffee in the 1500s but lacked the manpower to harvest the coffee beans. As a result, the Guatemalan government forced indigenous people to work on the fields. This led to a strain in the indigenous and Guatemalan people's relationship that still exists today.[74][75] A notable exception is Costa Rica where a lack of ready labor prevented the formation of large farms. Smaller farms and more egalitarian conditions ameliorated unrest over the 19th and 20th centuries.

In the 20th century Latin American countries faced a possible economic collapse. Before World War II Europe was consuming large amounts of coffee. Once the war started Latin America lost 40% of its market and was on the verge of economic collapse. Coffee was and is a Latin American commodity. The United States saw this and talked with the Latin American countries and as a result the producers agreed on an equitable division of the U.S. market. The U.S. government monitored this agreement. For the period that this plan was followed the value of coffee doubled, which greatly benefited coffee producers and the Latin American countries.[76]

Brazil became the largest producer of coffee in the world by 1852 and it has held that status ever since. It dominated world production, exporting more coffee than the rest of the world combined, from 1850 to 1950. The period since 1950 saw the widening of the playing field due to the emergence of several other major producers, notably Colombia, Ivory Coast, Ethiopia, and, most recently, Vietnam, which overtook Colombia and became the second-largest producer in 1999 and reached 15% market share by 2011.[77]

Recent additions to the coffee market are lattes, Frappuccinos and other sugary coffee drinks. This has caused coffee houses to be able to use cheaper coffee beans in their coffee.
Asia

During the cultivation, brewed coffee was reserved exclusively for the priesthood and the medical profession; doctors would use the brew for patients experiencing a need for better digestion, and priests used it to stay alert during their long nights of studying for the church.[78]
India
Main article: Coffee production in India
Monsooned Malabar arabica, compared with green Yirgachefe beans from Ethiopia

Coffee came to India well before the East India company

Coffee's introduction to India is credited to the "Mughal era", particularly through a Sufi saint named "Baba Budan".

In the 17th century, the first record of coffee growing in India is following the introduction of coffee beans from Yemen, during his pilgrimage to Mecca. He planted these beans in the Chandragiri hills of Karnataka, which are now named Baba Budan Giri in his honor. This act marked the beginning of coffee cultivation in India, extending south to Kodagu.[79]

In India, the word for coffee is "kaapi" in several South Indian languages, such as Tamil, Telugu, and Kannada.

Coffee production in India is dominated in the hill tracts of South Indian states, with the state of Karnataka accounting 53% followed by Kerala 28% and Tamil Nadu 11% of production of 8,200 Tonnes. Indian coffee is said to be the finest coffee grown in the shade rather than direct sunlight anywhere in the world.[80] There are approximately 250,000 coffee growers in India; 98% of them are small growers.[81] As of 2009, the production of coffee in India was only 4.5% of the total production in the world. Almost 80% of the country's coffee production is exported.[82] Of that which is exported, 70% is bound for Germany, Russian federation, Spain, Belgium, Slovenia, United States, Japan, Greece, Netherlands and France, and Italy accounts for 29% of the exports. Most of the export is shipped through the Suez Canal.[80]

Coffee is grown in three regions of India with Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu forming the traditional coffee growing region of South India, followed by the new areas developed in the non-traditional areas of Andhra Pradesh and Orissa in the eastern coast of the country and with a third region comprising the states of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh of Northeastern India, popularly known as "Seven Sister States of India".[83]

Indian coffee, grown mostly in southern India under monsoon rainfall conditions, is also termed as "Indian monsooned coffee". Its flavour is defined as: "The best Indian coffee reaches the flavour characteristics of Pacific coffees, but at its worst it is simply bland and uninspiring".[84] The two well-known species of coffee grown are the Arabica and Robusta. The first variety that was introduced in the Baba Budan Giri hill ranges of Karnataka in the 17th century[85] was marketed over the years under the brand names of Kent and S.795. Coffee is served in a distinctive drip-style "filter coffee" across Southern India.
Chikmagalur

Coffee is the cornerstone of Chikmagalur's economy. Chikmagalur is the birthplace of coffee in India, where the seed was first sown about 350 years ago. Coffee Board is the department located in Chikmagalur town that oversees the production and marketing of coffee cultivated in the district.

Coffee is cultivated in Chikmagalur district in an area of around 85,465 hectares with Arabica being the dominant variety grown in upper hills and Robusta being the major variety in the low-level hills. There are around 15,000 coffee growers in this district with 96% of them being small growers with holdings of less than or equal to 4 hectares. The average production is 55,000 MT: 35,000 MT of Arabica and 20,000 MT of Robusta.

The average productivity per hectare is 810 kg for Arabica and 1110 kg of Robusta, which are higher than the national average.

Arabica is a species of coffee that is also known as the "coffee shrub of Arabia", "mountain coffee" or "arabica coffee". Coffea arabica is believed to be the first species of coffee to be cultivated, being grown in southwest Arabia for well over 1,000 years. It is considered to produce better coffee than the other major commercially grown coffee species, Coffea canephora (Robusta). Arabica contains less caffeine than any other commercially cultivated species of coffee. Robusta is a species of coffee which has its origins in western Africa. It is grown mostly in Africa and Brazil, where it is often called Conillon. It is also grown in Southeast Asia where French colonists introduced it in the late 19th century. In recent years Vietnam, which only produces Robusta, has surpassed Brazil, India, and Indonesia to become the world's single largest exporter. Approximately one third of the coffee produced in the world is Robusta.
Japan
Main article: Coffee in Japan

Coffee was introduced to Japan by the Dutch in the 17th century but remained a curiosity until the lifting of trade restrictions in 1858. The first European-style coffeehouse opened in Tokyo in 1888 and closed four years later.[86] By the early 1930s there were over 30,000 coffeehouses across the country; availability in the wartime and immediate postwar period dropped to nearly zero, then rapidly increased as import barriers were removed. The introduction of freeze-dried instant coffee, canned coffee, and franchises such as Starbucks and Doutor Coffee in the late 20th century continued this trend, to the point that Japan is now one of the leading per capita coffee consumers in the world.[87]
South Korea

Coffee's first notable Korean enthusiasts were 19th century emperors Sunjong and Gojong, who preferred to consume it after western-style banquets.[88] After Korea's first coffee shop opened 1902, coffee was enjoyed by Korea's elites, who viewed coffee as a symbol of western culture and status. Coffee was later introduced to the general public in the 1950s by American soldiers stationed in Korea. The number of small, individually owned coffee shops, called dabang, increased rapidly; by the late 1950s, there were over 3,000 of them.[89] In 1976, Korean beverage company Dongsuh Foods introduced the coffee mix, a mixture of instant coffee, creamer and sugar packaged in individual packets. This product contributed to the popularization of instant coffee, and later became an office staple after the Asian financial crisis.[90] By the 1980s instant coffee and canned coffee had become fairly popular, with a more minor tradition of independently owned coffeehouses in larger cities. Toward the end of the century the growth of franchises such as Caffe Bene and Starbucks brought about a greater demand for European-style coffee, and led to the decline of dabangs.[91]
Indonesia
Main article: Coffee production in Indonesia

Coffee was first introduced by the Dutch during colonization in the late 17th century. After several years coffee was planted on Indonesia Archipelago. Many coffee specialties are from the Indonesian Archipelago. The colloquial name for coffee, Java, comes from the time when most of Europe and America's coffee was grown in Java. Today Indonesia is one of the largest coffee producers in the world, mainly for export. However, coffee is enjoyed in various ways around the archipelago, for example, the traditional "kopi tubruk".
Philippines

The Philippines is one of the few countries that produces the four varieties of commercially viable coffee: Arabica, Liberica (Barako), Excelsa and Robusta.[92] Although it is generally said that coffee was introduced to Lipa in 1740 by a Spanish Franciscan friar,[93] there is actually little first-hand evidence to substantiate this.[94] Regardless, by the early 19th century, coffee was being cultivated throughout the Philippines and subsequently exported to America and Australia, followed by Europe with the opening of the Suez Canal.[93] Lipa is commonly attributed as being the center of this cultivation, until roughly 1889, when its industry abruptly failed, likely due to pests, coffee rust (which the Philippines had managed to avoid for longer than the rest of the world), and political factors.[94]

Following this destruction, the Philippines' place in the global coffee supply chain faltered, and would be slow to recover. Throughout the 20th century, various government initiatives were implemented to revive the industry,[95] despite that the Philippines would gradually begin importing more instant coffee than it was exporting. Regardless, a coffee culture has been developing since the 1990s, following the Philippines joining the International Coffee Organization in 1980, and now many specialty coffee shops can be found around the country.[96]
Vietnam

Vietnam is one of the world's main coffee exporters.[97] Arabica is the first imported coffee variety to Vietnam since 1857.[citation needed] Initially being grown in the northern provinces,[citation needed] the cultivation of coffee spread until it reached the Central and Western Highlands, which now produce a majority of Vietnam's coffee.[98][99] Most notably among these is the city of Buôn Ma Thuột, which is known as the "coffee capital of Vietnam".[100]

Trung Nguyen Coffee was founded in 1996 by Dang Le Nguyen Vu, and is the premier coffee brand in Vietnam to this day.
Production

The first step in Europeans' wresting the means of production was effected by Nicolaes Witsen, the enterprising burgomaster of Amsterdam and member of the governing board of the Dutch East India Company who urged Joan van Hoorn, the Dutch governor at Batavia that some coffee plants be obtained at the export port of Mocha in Yemen, the source of Europe's supply, and established in the Dutch East Indies;[101] the project of raising many plants from the seeds of the first shipment met with such success that the Dutch East India Company was able to supply Europe's demand with "Java coffee" by 1719.[102] Encouraged by their success, they soon had coffee plantations in Ceylon, Sumatra and other Sunda islands.[103] Coffee trees were soon grown under glass at the Hortus Botanicus of Leiden, whence slips were generously extended to other botanical gardens. Dutch representatives at the negotiations that led to the Treaty of Utrecht presented their French counterparts with a coffee plant, which was grown on at the Jardin du Roi, predecessor of the Jardin des Plantes, in Paris.

The introduction of coffee to the Americas was effected by Captain Gabriel des Clieux, who obtained cuttings from the reluctant botanist Antoine de Jussieu, who was loath to disfigure the king's coffee tree.[104] Clieux, when water rations dwindled during a difficult voyage, shared his portion with his precious plants and protected them from a Dutchman, perhaps an agent of the Provinces jealous of the Batavian trade.[105] Clieux nurtured the plants on his arrival in the West Indies, and established them in Guadeloupe and Saint-Domingue in addition to Martinique, where a blight had struck the cacao plantations, which were replaced by coffee plantations in a space of three years, is attributed to France through its colonization of many parts of the continent starting with the Martinique and the colonies of the West Indies where the first French coffee plantations were founded.

The first coffee plantation in Brazil occurred in 1727 when Lt. Col. Francisco de Melo Palheta smuggled seeds, still essentially from the germ plasm originally taken from Yemen to Batavia,[106] from French Guiana. By the 1800s, Brazil's harvests would turn coffee from an elite indulgence to a drink for the masses. Brazil, which like most other countries cultivates coffee as a commercial commodity, relied heavily on slave labor from Africa for the viability of the plantations until the abolition of slavery in 1888. The success of coffee in 17th-century Europe was paralleled with the spread of the habit of tobacco smoking all over the continent during the course of the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648).

For many decades in the 19th and early 20th centuries, Brazil was the biggest producer of coffee and a virtual monopolist in the trade. However, a policy of maintaining high prices soon opened opportunities to other nations, such as Venezuela, Colombia,[107] Guatemala, Nicaragua, Indonesia and Vietnam, now second only to Brazil as the major coffee producer in the world. Large-scale production in Vietnam began following normalization of trade relations with the US in 1995.[108] Nearly all of the coffee grown there is Robusta.[109]

Despite the origins of coffee cultivation in Ethiopia, that country produced only a small amount for export until the twentieth century, and much of that not from the south of the country but from the environs of Harar in the northeast. The Kingdom of Kaffa, home of the plant, was estimated to produce between 50,000 and 60,000 kilograms of coffee beans in the 1880s. Commercial production effectively began in 1907 with the founding of the inland port of Gambela. 100,000 kilograms of coffee was exported from Gambela in 1908, while in 1927–1928 over 4 million kilograms passed through that port.[23]: 202  Coffee plantations were also developed in Arsi Province at the same time and were eventually exported by means of the Addis Ababa – Djibouti Railway. While only 245,000 kilograms were freighted by the Railway, this amount jumped to 2,240,000 kilograms by 1922, surpassed exports of "Harari" coffee by 1925, and reached 9,260,000 kilograms in 1936.[23]: 203 

Australia is a minor coffee producer, with little product for export, but its coffee history goes back to 1880 when the first of 500 acres (2.0 km2) began to be developed in an area between northern New South Wales and Cooktown. Today there are several producers of Arabica coffee in Australia that use a mechanical harvesting system invented in 1981.[110] 